10000000000000000	Post Cold War Arms reduction in Europe What is being done under the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty  CFE  and under START to reduce weaponry in Europe.
19890120000000000	SOVIETS TO CUT TACTICAL NUCLEAR ARMS IN EUROPE. In the first such specific pledge by either superpower, the Soviet Union said Thursday that it will withdraw some tactical nuclear weapons from Central Europe along with the troops and tanks that it had previously promised to pull out. The announcement, which is expected to fuel debate within the U.S.-led North Atlantic Treaty Organization over plans to modernize its short-range nuclear missiles, was made in Vienna by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, addressing the final session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The text of his speech was distributed in full here by the official news agency, Tass. The Soviet foreign minister, elaborating on military cutbacks first announced by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the United Nations in New York last month, said: "While striving for the declared fundamental goal -- to end any foreign military presence and bases on the territories of other countries -- the Soviet Union will withdraw units with all their armaments, including tactical nuclear systems, from Central Europe." Gorbachev had said his country would unilaterally pull 50,000 troops and 5,000 tanks out of Eastern Europe within two years, but Shevardnadze's was the first mention that the cutback included nuclear weaponry. Short-range or tactical -- sometimes also called battlefield nuclear weapons -- have a range of up to 300 miles and include nuclear-tipped artillery shells as well as missiles. They are not covered under terms of the 1987 Soviet-American agreement to eliminate ground-launched intermediate-range nuclear weapons -- those with ranges of 300 to 3,400 miles -- worldwide. Nor are they part of the ongoing strategic arms reduction talks, which deal with intercontinental ballistic missiles, missiles launched by long-range submarines and aircraft, and long-range aircraft that carry nuclear bombs. State Department spokesman Charles Redman in Washington and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization spokesman in Brussels welcomed Shevardnadze's announcement Thursday. But both also noted that the Soviets have not yet supplied details of the type and quantity of weapons to be removed and that NATO unilaterally has already been cutting the size of its nuclear stockpile in Europe.  'Peace Offensive' While Shevardnadze did not reveal how many tactical nuclear weapons would be involved, or how many would remain in Warsaw Pact arsenals, his comments maintained the momentum of a Kremlin "peace offensive" that has appeared to leave the West scrambling to regain the moral high ground. Gorbachev also announced a planned 500,000-man cut in the Soviet military at last month's U.N. meeting, and on Wednesday he said the defense budget is to be reduced by 14.2%. The Soviet leader has said that he wants to cut military spending to help solve serious economic problems at home, particularly shortages of food and other consumer goods. Although the military cuts announced so far are unilateral, the Kremlin is clearly looking for some response from the West. And that was certainly true of Shevardnadze's statements Thursday. Noting that "the tactical nuclear weapons issue is being actively debated," the Soviet official stressed that Moscow "is not modernizing its tactical nuclear missiles." "We unequivocally proceed from the premise that nuclear missile modernization is a step backward, not forward," he said, and he proposed that "talks on these weapons be started."  NATO Commitment Sought His remarks were seen as aimed at NATO generally and West Germany in particular. The United States and Britain are pushing for an alliance commitment to produce a new short-range nuclear missile to replace the aging Lance missiles based in West Germany. But the Germans are resisting, particularly in light of the overall reduction of East-West tensions since Gorbachev came to power. A NATO official in Brussels quoted by the Reuters news agency called Shevardnadze's statement a "propaganda gambit. . . . It seems aimed at our work (on modernization) which they know we have been looking at, and is intended to create more problems in Germany." Redman, in Washington, made it clear that NATO will continue its modernization plans. "Of course, NATO will continue to retain in Europe those up-to-date forces and the minimum number of nuclear weapons needed to maintain a strategy of deterrence," he said. NATO maintains that it needs tactical nuclear weapons to counter an overwhelming superiority in conventional (non-nuclear) weaponry enjoyed by Warsaw Pact forces in Europe. As long as that imbalance lasts, NATO argues, it needs modern, short-range nuclear weapons as a last resort to stop an otherwise indefensible, all-out East Bloc ground assault. It refers to the nuclear option as "flexible response." According to a NATO assessment of the European balance of forces published last November, the Warsaw Pact enjoys a 3-2 advantage in manpower, a 3-1 advantage in battle tanks and artillery, and a 2-1 advantage in combat aircraft. There is considerable debate over the figures even in the West, and the Soviets contend that they are at best misleading. Shevardnadze told the Vienna conference Thursday that "by the end of January, the Soviet Union and its allies will make public their numerical data on troops and armaments of the sides in Europe." A previous set of negotiations known as the Mutual and Balanced Forces Reduction talks remained stalled for most of their 15-year duration over disagreement on the basic numbers of forces on each side. But in Vienna this week, the foreign ministers of all 35 participating countries signed an accord that includes provision for new talks between the 16 NATO members and the seven Warsaw Pact countries aimed at reducing conventional weapons and troop levels across the continent. These talks are slated to begin March 9. With earlier failures clearly in mind, Shevardnadze warned Thursday that while "we do not ignore the importance of initial data, . . . figures should not become an obstacle to politics. Long and fruitless discussions on categories of armaments and methods for counting troops may clog up the talks." He proposed that the two sides coordinate "mutually acceptable quantitative 'ceilings' on troops and armaments of the sides." "In present conditions," he added, "we shall also be able to coordinate verification measures which will give full confidence that the established limits on troops and armaments are observed." Stephen Ledogar, the chief U.S. negotiator named for the March talks, called Shevardnadze's speech "upbeat," but he also rejected the idea of any freeze in NATO's tactical missile modernization plan. The NATO spokesman in Brussels said that if Moscow's decision to withdraw tactical nuclear weapons "signals that, in this field also, the Soviets are now beginning to realize that their potential far exceeds legitimate requirements, we can only find such steps encouraging." Redman noted, as did the NATO spokesman, that "The Soviet Union . . . is following NATO's lead. Since 1979, NATO has unilaterally reduced the size of its nuclear stockpile in Europe by 2,400 warheads. Today, NATO's stockpile of nuclear weapons is at its lowest level in 20 years. To date, NATO's unilateral reductions have not been matched by the Soviet Union, which maintains a larger number of modern nuclear systems in Europe than does NATO." Concerning Wednesday's announcement by Gorbachev about the planned reduction in the Soviet defense budget, Redman noted that the Kremlin's defense budget has never been revealed and said "a percentage of what -- we don't know what the starting point is." Nevertheless, he said, "We welcome the announcement that, of the 10,000 tanks to be reduced, 5,000 will be 'physically liquidated,' with the remainder to be converted to other uses. Likewise, we note with interest Gorbachev's clarification regarding the removal of 5,300 of the most modern tanks in the Soviet arsenal within the overall reduction." Thursday's closing session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ended 27 months of what the Soviet foreign minister described as "intense, at times dramatic, and yet unprecedentedly purposeful and democratic" East-West dialogue. The 35-nation accord that was the result puts forth a sweeping definition of human rights to be protected, including freer travel and religious practice, environmental protection, and economic cooperation. "The Vienna accord is a landmark on the way to a fundamentally new Europe," Shevardnadze said. The meeting, he added, "shook the 'Iron Curtain,' loosening its rusted joints, piercing still more holes in it, and enhancing its corrosion. It warmed the Cold War channel with the swell of new currents. Europe may only welcome this." Times staff writer Norman Kempster, in Washington, contributed to this article.
19890310000000000	EAST-WEST CONVENTIONAL ARMS TALKS START. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact on Thursday opened talks aimed at reducing conventional weapons in Europe and building trust among the Continent's nations. Arms reduction proposals presented by each military bloc at the negotiations underlined the differences between the sides, particularly over air and naval forces and tactical nuclear weapons. But the top Soviet negotiator, Oleg A. Grinevsky, said the problems are not insurmountable, and he held out hope of an initial agreement by the early 1990s. Chief U.S. negotiator Steven J. Ledogar said the negotiations are off to a good start but that NATO does not want to set a time frame for possible agreements. "We are not really that far apart," he said.  2 Sets of Meetings Two sets of talks are being held in Vienna's majestic Hofburg palace -- one between the 16 NATO and seven Warsaw Pact nations on conventional armed forces in Europe, the other on building trust among the 35 nations that signed the 1975 Helsinki accords. In Washington, President Bush heralded the start of the talks, saying: "Today marks the beginning of a process of great importance for the people of Europe, the United States and Canada and for all who share the hope of a safer and more secure Europe." He said the negotiations on conventional forces "offer a new opportunity to redress the imbalance in military forces which strongly favors the Warsaw Pact." On the talks on improving East-West relations, he said: "Our aim is to lift the veil of secrecy from certain military activities and forces and thus contribute to a more stable Europe. "Although these two negotiations have different participants and aim at different kinds of accords, they share a common purpose. That purpose is to make Europe safer, to reduce the risk of war and strengthen stability on the Continent that has seen more bloodshed in this century than any other part of the world," Bush said. Outlining the Warsaw Pact's stance on conventional arms, Grinevsky proposed deep cuts by 1994 in troop numbers, tanks, artillery and other land weapons and combat aircraft. He gave no numbers but said both blocs should eliminate any imbalances and then trim to 10% to 15% below their present lowest levels. In a second phase, from 1994-97, both sides should trim troop numbers by 25%, or about 500,000 military personnel, he said. In a third phase, by the year 2000, the alliances should move to strictly defensive forces. By contrast, NATO wants specific overall ceilings. Under its proposal, each side should be limited to 20,000 tanks, 16,500 artillery pieces and 23,000 armored personnel carriers. NATO says the proposal would eliminate the danger of a surprise attack and a 2-to-1 Warsaw Pact edge in those weapons. As outlined in a paper given to reporters, the Warsaw Pact proposal at the closed-door negotiations made no specific mention of tactical nuclear weapons.
19890311000000000	SOVIET EXPERT TELLS HOUSE PANEL OF UNILATERAL WEAPONS CUTS BY KREMLIN. A Soviet arms expert, only the second Soviet official ever to testify formally before Congress, said Friday that Moscow is making unilateral cuts in its naval, chemical and short-range nuclear missile forces in addition to the 500,000-troop reduction announced last December. It is also reconfiguring remaining forces to be more defensively oriented, said Andrei A. Kokoshin, a deputy director of a Soviet institute that studies the United States. Some of the cuts described by Kokoshin are relatively minor and have been under way for several years. But he invited reciprocal American cuts to sustain the momentum in arms control begun with the 1987 treaty eliminating ground-launched medium-range nuclear missiles. Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee before which Kokoshin appeared, asked whether the unilateral Soviet moves mean that Moscow is skeptical about the chances of success of the new Vienna talks to reduce conventional forces in Europe. "The negotiations will be very difficult," Kokoshin replied carefully. He cited the large number of countries involved in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization-Warsaw Pact discussions, and the large number of weapons systems of different characteristics to be balanced against each other. "Our goals could be met by negotiation or by parallel steps" to reduce the armaments, he said. With American flags draped behind him, Kokoshin was invited by Aspin to testify as part of what Aspin hopes will be a series of exchanges of U.S. and Soviet experts on military affairs and arms control. The only previous appearance before Congress by a Soviet official occurred in 1986 when an articulate young diplomat from the embassy here, Vitaly Churkin, testified on the nuclear accident at Chernobyl. The cuts listed by Kokoshin have been "largely confirmed by the U.S. intelligence community," a congressional source said in a briefing to the same House committee a day earlier. The cuts, as reported by Kokoshin: -- Withdrawal of 24 short-range (under 300 miles) nuclear missiles from East Germany, and a halt in programs to modernize these "tactical" weapons. He did not identify the type to be withdrawn, but the Soviets and their allies have more than 300 missiles of two varieties, the Scud and the SS-21, deployed there. The Soviet move is an obvious effort to maintain pressure on West Germany to further delay approval of a new version of the U.S. Lance short-range missile that would be deployed on its territory and to support Soviet calls for negotiations to eliminate these nuclear systems. -- Destruction and dismantlement of the Soviet chemical weapon stockpiles. Kokoshin said that the work began this year, as previously promised. U.S. authorities believe that only obsolete and deteriorating weapons are being destroyed, and Aspin noted later that the Soviets have not renounced continued production of chemical weapons. -- Reductions in naval vessels, particularly in the Far East, where 40 vessels have been taken out of service between 1984 and 1988. Kokoshin was not specific about what kind of ships were removed. The Soviet Pacific fleet includes more than 300 surface combatants and auxiliaries, including two aircraft carriers and almost 100 submarines. Kokoshin added details on the pace of the major Soviet reductions in East Europe that were announced by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the United Nations last December, and he described reorganization efforts of remaining Soviet forces. Of the half-million-troop reduction, Kokoshin explained that 450,000 men would come from Soviet forces in the Soviet Union, while 50,000 would come from Soviet forces in East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, over a two-year period. In addition, the Soviets will eliminate 10,000 tanks, 8,500 artillery pieces and 800 combat aircraft, also over a two-year period. About 5,300 of the tanks will come from six Soviet tank divisions in three East European nations. These thinned-out divisions will be equipped with more anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons, Kokoshin said. "This changes the standard division from offensive to defensive" orientation, he said.
19890512000000000	SOVIETS PLAN TO WITHDRAW 500 WARHEADS; GORBACHEV ALSO CALLS FOR MUTUAL CUTBACKS OF FORCES IN EUROPE. Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in the kind of surprise move that has become his trademark, told Secretary of State James A. Baker III on Thursday that he will withdraw 500 nuclear warheads from Europe and will seek cuts of more than 2 million troops from the NATO and Soviet Bloc armies, U.S. officials said. Gorbachev's announcement, made during a Kremlin meeting on the second day of Baker's two-day visit to the Soviet Union, came as part of a concerted effort by the Soviet leader to pressure the United States toward negotiations over short-range nuclear weapons -- an issue that has increasingly divided the Atlantic Alliance. Gorbachev challenged Baker directly to bring the United States into talks on battlefield nuclear weapons, but the secretary of state, repeating the Bush Administration's position, refused. "We aren't negotiating," said a senior Baker aide who attended the meeting. Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze called the U.S. position "very negative" and told reporters, "This is of grave concern to us." The continued deadlock over short-range nuclear forces had been expected, but Gorbachev's promise to withdraw 500 warheads unilaterally was clearly intended to dramatize the issue. Baker aides noted ruefully that the move would almost surely sharpen the already worrisome division within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization between the United States and West Germany, which has called for early negotiations on battlefield nuclear weapons. Baker sought to play down the significance of Gorbachev's gesture. "It's a good step, but a small step -- a modest move toward a more equal balance in Europe," he told reporters on his plane leaving Moscow on Thursday evening. "I'd like to also point out . . . that NATO has unilaterally reduced nuclear weapons in Europe by more than 2,400 weapons since 1979." Other U.S. officials noted that the Soviet Union is believed to have as many as 10,000 short-range nuclear warheads in Europe, so that a cut of 500 may represent only 5%. But they acknowledged that the Soviet leader appeared to have scored another coup in the continuing East-West battle for public opinion in Europe. "Vintage Gorbachev," said one. "He's extraordinary," sighed another. U.S. officials had half expected such a move, they said, but the specific form came as a surprise. Despite the continuing disagreement over short-range weapons, both Soviet and American officials said they are pleased with their talks -- Baker's first full-scale meeting with Soviet officials since President Bush was inaugurated. "I'm very satisfied," Baker said after his talks in the Kremlin, which included 3 1/2 hours with Gorbachev. Asked whether the talks had helped end the Cold War, he replied, "We're certainly moving in that direction." "We made a good start on a long road," Shevardnadze said. But he added that the Soviet government is still impatient with the Bush Administration's slow start in arms control, which he called "the center of gravity for U.S.-Soviet relations." "The secretary of state told us that the United States has not yet prepared specific negotiating positions, but stressed in these new positions we would be able to see a substantial degree of continuity (from the Reagan Administration)," Shevardnadze said. The two did agree to resume the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) on long-range nuclear weapons, along with negotiations on nuclear testing and other issues, in mid-June, they said. But they postponed any talk of a first summit meeting between Gorbachev and Bush until the fall, making a summit unlikely before December. Meanwhile, the issue of short-range nuclear weapons will clearly remain a major point of contention, not only between Washington and Moscow but between the Bush Administration and several of its European allies as well. U.S. officials say NATO's forces need the weapons -- nuclear missiles, artillery shells and bombs carried by tactical aircraft with ranges under 300 miles -- to counterbalance the Warsaw Pact's larger numbers of troops and tanks. But both the Soviet Union and West Germany have called for early negotiations to reduce the number of such weapons, most of which would explode on German soil if they were ever used. Baker is scheduled to meet today with West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher to discuss the issue -- only hours before Genscher is to welcome Shevardnadze on a well-timed visit to Bonn. Shevardnadze described Gorbachev's decision to withdraw the 500 warheads only vaguely as "some unilateral measures covering the reduction of tactical nuclear arsenals in Europe." But a U.S. official aboard Baker's plane described it as "a very small reduction for them." He said Gorbachev told the Americans that the weapons would include 284 short-range missiles, 166 nuclear bombs carried aboard short-range airplanes and 50 nuclear artillery shells, for a total of 500. He noted that the withdrawal would still leave the Soviet Bloc with more tactical nuclear weapons and larger conventional armed forces than the Atlantic Alliance, and thus would not affect the U.S. position of rejecting negotiations on short-range weapons. Gorbachev's announcement that he will propose massive cuts in military manpower on both sides came as part of a new, more detailed Soviet proposal for the current Vienna talks on conventional forces in Europe, U.S. officials said. Gorbachev told Baker that he will soon propose a troop ceiling of 1,350,000 for each military alliance in Europe, they said. NATO estimates its forces at 2.2 million and Warsaw Pact forces at 3.1 million; Gorbachev's proposal could mean a cut of 850,000 NATO troops and more than 1.7 million Soviet Bloc troops. Using NATO estimates, that would be a reduction of about 38% in NATO forces, and about 54% for Soviet Bloc forces. The Soviet Bloc estimates that NATO and its own forces have roughly equal numbers of troops, and with those figures, Gorbachev's proposed cutback would mean cuts by a similar percentage on both sides. Gorbachev also said he plans to call for a 55% reduction in NATO strike aircraft and helicopters; scrapping 40,000 Warsaw Pact tanks, to bring both sides down to an equal ceiling of 20,000; and similar cuts in other combat vehicles and artillery, to be implemented by 1997. Those proposed cuts in conventional armed forces had already been suggested -- without the details -- by Shevardnadze at the opening of the Vienna conference in March. But Gorbachev's announcement appeared likely to increase pressure on the West to be more flexible in the talks. NATO has proposed more modest cuts of up to 10% in conventional weapons but has not included aircraft or troops in its proposals. U.S. officials noted that Moscow could unilaterally carry out the withdrawal of 500 nuclear warheads, but that the proposals for troop reductions and other cuts would have to be negotiated at the Vienna talks. The Soviet proposal is expected to be formally presented in Vienna today. Gorbachev unveiled his proposals in the middle of an unusually long meeting with Baker in the Kremlin's ornate St. Catherine's Hall, U.S. officials said. First, Baker met alone for an hour with Gorbachev and Shevardnadze, handing them a letter from President Bush expressing U.S. support for Soviet economic and political reforms. Then, after another hour of talks at a long table with half a dozen senior aides on each side, Gorbachev said, "I want to give you an advance look at some proposals I'm going to make," and outlined his plan animatedly -- without notes. Baker did not respond specifically to either proposal, they said, although he engaged Gorbachev in a lengthy debate over the imbalance of both conventional and tactical nuclear forces. On other issues, both Baker and Shevardnadze said they made progress on finding points of agreement on Central America, although the Soviets did not accede to a U.S. request to halt aid to the Marxist regime in Nicaragua. "We agreed to work toward a political and diplomatic solution to the problem of Nicaragua," Baker said, without providing any details. And in the Middle East, he said, "We think there may be a fair amount of common ground." U.S. officials said they are heartened by the Soviets' willingness to discuss seriously Israel's current proposal for elections among the Palestinians of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Both foreign ministers said they had established a new personal rapport, in part during a private dinner which Shevardnadze and his wife held for Baker and his wife, Susan, in their Moscow apartment. "I feel good personal relations are being established between the foreign ministers of the two superpowers," Shevardnadze said. Times staff writer Robert C. Toth, in Washington, contributed to this article.
19890525000000000	SOVIET OFFER MAY SPEED CONVENTIONAL ARMS PACT. The latest Soviet proposal on force cuts in Europe, which the State Department welcomed as a "very positive development," significantly advances prospects for a new agreement on conventional arms reduction in the foreseeable future, U.S. officials said Wednesday. Important differences remain, but the Moscow offer made in talks in Vienna coincides largely with a North Atlantic Treaty Organization opening proposal for limits on tanks and other equipment. More importantly, it accepts the NATO concept of limiting a single country's contribution to an alliance to 60% to 70% of the alliance's total war materiel, as well as limiting how much of a single country's materiel can be stationed outside home borders. The effect would be to curb Moscow's capacity to intimidate its East European allies. The new Soviet moves, according to U.S. officials, also should improve prospects for two other key sets of superpower arms negotiations. "We view this as a serious and substantive proposal that is being received as such," said State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler. "We treat and accept this seriously, and it's a very positive development." White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater echoed the enthusiastic evaluation. "Those are major, major concessions (by the Soviets) that put them more in line with the NATO proposal," he said. "It's an offer that's on the table. It's not a speech." U.S. officials said that the conventional arms proposal made Tuesday could speed agreement on the prickly issue of the future of short-range nuclear missiles in Europe. That is now the subject of a major dispute between the United States and West Germany that threatens to mar next week's NATO summit meeting in Brussels.  Affects Other Arms Talks East-West talks on reducing the missiles, which West Germany wants, could begin sooner if the negotiations on conventional forces progress quickly, since the United States views the missiles as an important counterforce against the East Bloc's superiority in troops and non-nuclear weapons. Also, the strategic arms reduction talks on cutting intercontinental nuclear arsenals in half could benefit, because some experts believed that the forum for those talks was getting too far ahead of the conventional force talks. Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, for example, had complained that reductions in nuclear arms could give Moscow new opportunities to exploit its overwhelming conventional superiority. An increased pace in the conventional talks would ease this concern. Although billed in some reports as a surprise, the ceilings proposed Tuesday by the Soviets on men and equipment had been disclosed to Secretary of State James A. Baker III during his trip to Moscow two weeks ago by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Tutwiler called the formal Soviet proposal laid on the table in Vienna an "elaboration" and a "fleshing out" of Gorbachev's comments. A State Department expert said that with the offer "the Soviets have basically accepted NATO positions already offered at Vienna. There will still be fights over whether to include manpower and aircraft in the first phase of reductions (over the next six or seven years), which we don't want to do but the Soviets do, and some other issues. "But it's as if the Soviets decided numbers don't matter that much, that it's more important to reduce their overall defense burden, keep up the momentum toward agreement, improve their image, rather than squabble over 1,000 tanks or so," he added. The expert said that an accord on conventional forces, as well as strategic arms, may now be possible in "as early as a year for either or both." That could occur, he said, "if we get decisions at the highest political levels on which matters can be compromised," he said. The Soviet-initiated Warsaw Pact proposal does not meet directly with each point of the NATO proposal. On the other hand, it calls for cuts in some categories -- manpower and aircraft -- that NATO ignored. The NATO proposal, in contrast, calls for indirect manpower cuts -- through withdrawal of the manpower needed to operate tanks, armored personnel carriers and artillery as that equipment is reduced. On tanks, NATO proposed 20,000 total for each alliance within Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural Mountains. No single country could have more than 12,000 tanks. Of these, no country could have more than 3,200 tanks outside its own borders, that is, on the territory of an ally. The Soviet proposal accepts the 20,000 total, but called for 14,000 tanks as the single nation maximum and 4,500 tanks as the out-of-country maximum. The discrepancies may arise partly because the Soviets count small armored scout cars as tanks while NATO does not. Once that difference is eliminated, the gap between should be reduced. Similarly, NATO would limit artillery pieces to 16,500 total, 10,000 for one country, with 1,700 maximum abroad. The Warsaw Pact proposed 24,000 total pieces, 17,000 for one country and 4,000 abroad. Here again, the two sides count differently, with the Soviet Bloc including 75-millimeter artillery and large mortars while NATO tallies only artillery of 105 millimeters and larger. NATO would limit armored personnel carriers to 33,500 total, 16,800 for a single nation, and 6,000 out of country. The comparable Warsaw Pact proposal was 28,000, 18,000 and 7,500, respectively. The size of the proposed manpower is not clear. The Washington Post reported that the Warsaw Pact would cut 1.26 million troops from its forces. Baker was told by Gorbachev that the offer was for equal ceilings of 1.35 million men for each alliance, a senior official said. Reuters news service reported that the Warsaw Pact had proposed a ceiling of 920,000 on any single nation within either alliance. NATO does not want to discuss cuts in fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters. But the Warsaw Pact, contending that NATO has an advantage in both quantity and quality of these weapons, proposed a ceiling of 1,200 attack aircraft and 1,350 helicopters for national forces, and 350 and 600, respectively, stationed on foreign territory.
19890530000000000	BUSH OFFERS PLAN FOR DRASTIC CUTS IN EUROPEAN FORCES. President Bush, in a sweeping arms reduction proposal he declared would "transform the military map of Europe," proposed on Monday deep cuts in manpower and aircraft to be negotiated within six months to a year. And early this morning, after meetings that stretched late into the night, NATO foreign ministers reached agreement on the divisive issue of whether to cut NATO's short-range nuclear forces, senior U.S. officials confirmed. The agreement, which must still be ratified by the NATO heads of government before it is officially announced, is a compromise between positions taken by the United States and Britain on the one hand and West Germany on the other. It would leave several aspects of the dispute sufficiently vague to allow both sides to claim at least a partial victory.  Cuts by 1992 or 1993 When the summit meeting opened Monday morning, Bush, seeking to seize the initiative on arms control from Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, told the leaders of the other 15 North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations here that his proposed reductions could be accomplished by 1992 or 1993. "There is no reason why a five- to six-year timetable" suggested by Gorbachev in the Soviets' earlier arms reduction proposal is necessary, the President declared. "We may be on the verge of a revolutionary and more ambitious arms control agreement than anyone considered possible," he said. Agreement on compromise language on short-range missiles was the final step needed to allow NATO to conclude its 40th anniversary summit with a comprehensive statement of the alliance's strategy for negotiations with the Warsaw Pact. Although compromise language was worked out by Secretary of State James A. Baker III and his fellow foreign ministers, it must still be reviewed by Bush and the other NATO chiefs. And, a senior European diplomat warned, the hard-line position of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher might yet prove to be a stumbling block. West Germany has been pressing for "early" negotiations with the Soviets over the short-range forces. In addition, the Bonn government, particularly Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, has pushed for NATO to declare that total elimination of short-range weapons is the alliance's ultimate goal. The United States and Britain, by contrast, have insisted that negotiations over the short-range forces can begin only after a treaty on limiting conventional, non-nuclear forces has been negotiated. And both Bush and Thatcher have insisted on ruling out the possibility of eliminating the weapons altogether. Washington and London have feared that eliminating short-range forces would open the door to eventual total "de-nuclearization" of Europe, a step that would leave NATO vulnerable to the far-larger non-nuclear forces of the Soviet Union and its allies.  Work for 'Partial Reductions' Under the compromise worked out this morning, the alliance would agree to work toward "partial reductions" in short-range weapons. The statement does not explicitly rule out the German request for a total reduction, as Thatcher has wanted, but U.S. officials say the language satisfies them. "It is certainly consistent with an American position," one senior negotiator said. Negotiations over the short-range forces would begin as soon as a conventional arms agreement is implemented, sources said. But because Bush is calling for completing those negotiations within a year, that schedule apparently will meet the German demand for "early" talks. But completing a conventional accord along the lines of Bush's new proposals will be extraordinarily complex, and it may be difficult to meet the President's timetable, Administration officials conceded. "It makes strategic arms talks look simple by comparison," said a senior official, referring to the negotiations on long-range nuclear missiles. The Bush proposals, embraced warmly by the other NATO leaders, would require the Warsaw Pact to make much deeper cuts in all categories of manpower and equipment because of their current overwhelming superiority in conventional forces.  Overall Ceiling of 275,000 Bush proposed an overall ceiling of 275,000 troops each for the United States and the Soviet Union in Europe. That would require the United States to cut its combat forces by 30,000 men and the Soviets to cut 10 times that number. As Bush told the allied leaders, bringing the Soviets to a "fair and balanced level of strength would compel the Soviets to reduce their 600,000-strong Red Army in Eastern Europe by 325,000." Based on NATO figures, the Bush proposals would require the Warsaw Pact to destroy eight times more planes and four times as many helicopters. Bush, responding to a series of Soviet proposals for reducing conventional forces, agreed for the first time to include manpower, helicopters and land-based military aircraft in the Conventional Forces in Europe talks in Vienna. Thatcher declared that the Bush proposal had "transformed the summit" but warned against excessive optimism. Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Netherlands said that accelerating the timetable for a treaty and implementing the reductions were the most significant parts of the Bush plan. "The experts may not be happy with this, but as a politician, I think it's the right thing to do," he said, in a reference to the complexity of negotiations ahead.  'A Fitting Legacy' Laying out his bold proposal at the opening session of NATO's two-day summit here, Bush told the other leaders, "It would be a fitting legacy to our grandchildren that, at NATO's 40th anniversary, we launched NATO's new agenda that broke down the military, political, and economic barriers that have separated East from West for most of our lifetime." The four-point Bush proposal, which builds on earlier negotiations at Vienna, includes: -- "Locking in" the Warsaw Pact's earlier acceptance of a NATO proposal that would set ceilings on each side's numbers of tanks and armored troop carriers. The Warsaw Pact would have to destroy 15 times more tanks and eight times more personnel carriers than NATO. Bush also proposed that NATO seek an agreement on a similar ceiling for artillery, provided questions of defining the artillery involved can be defined. All of the equipment reduced would be destroyed. -- Expanding the current NATO proposal so that each side would reduce its stocks of military planes and helicopters to 15% below current NATO levels. Again, all of the reduced equipment would be destroyed. -- Setting a 275,000 ceiling on U.S. and Soviet ground and air force personnel stationed outside their national territories. The United States would make its cut by reducing its combat troops -- roughly 150,000 of the total 305,000 U.S. force in Europe -- by 20%. Withdrawn service personnel on both sides would be demobilized, making it difficult for either side to conceal attempts to evade the limits. -- Accelerating the timetable for reaching a Vienna agreement and implementing the required reductions. As previously reported, Bush also told the NATO allies that the United States would agree to ease trade sanctions imposed in 1980 on the East Bloc after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. "I believe that it should be possible to reach such agreement in six months or maybe a year, and to accomplish the reductions by 1992 or 1993," Bush said at a brief press conference shortly after spelling out his proposals to the NATO leaders. The President, nettled by criticism that he had been too slow responding to Gorbachev's initiatives, said that he had deliberately taken his time to study the situation. "We knew exactly what we were doing all along," he said. He acknowledged his Administration "has taken a little bit of a hammering for not engaging in the public relations battle" with Gorbachev. But "the safety and security of American forces, for which I have direct responsibility as commander in chief, is too serious to be jeopardized by feeling we always have to be out front on some public relations gambit," he said.  BALANCE OF POWER -- Present Nato and Warsaw Pact forces, compared to Bush's proposed cuts. Personnel figures for U.S. and Soviet forces only; weapons figures include NATO and Warsaw Pact. PERSONNEL U.S.: 305,000 Soviet: 600,000 PROPOSED CEILING: 275,000  COMBAT AIRCRAFT NATO: 3,977 WARSAW PACT: 8,250 PROPOSED CEILING: 3,400  HELICOPTERS NATO: 2,419 WARSAW PACT: 3,700 PROPOSED CEILING: 2,000  TANKS NATO: 22,000 WARSAW PACT: 52,200 PROPOSED CEILING: 20,000  PERSONNEL CARRIERS NATO: 35,351 WARSAW PACT: 71,000 PROPOSED CEILING: 28,000 SOURCE: NATO estimates
19890712000000000	NATO OFFERS TO SPEED REDUCTIONS; BAKER OUTLINES PLAN TO BE GIVEN WARSAW PACT THURSDAY. In an effort to reach an early agreement, the NATO allies will present to the Warsaw Pact two months ahead of schedule their proposal to reduce troops and non-nuclear armories in Europe, Secretary of State James A. Baker III said today. Baker said the broadened proposal, to be presented in Vienna Thursday, will specify that each side have no more than 5,700 combat aircraft and 1,900 combat helicopters. "By tabling this proposal, we are taking a step toward ending the military division of Europe," Baker said. Under the proposal, developed to counter overtures by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, both the United States and Soviet Union would reduce military manpower -- both ground and air forcetroops -- in Europe to 275,000 each. In addition, the proposal will call for mutual reductions to 20,000 tanks and 20,000 troop carriers each, and a limit on artillery pieces of between 16,500 and 24,000 for each side, depending on definitions for each weapon agreed upon by the two sides, Baker said. Thursday's session of the Vienna arms talks is the last scheduled before a long summer recess. Submission of NATO's proposal before the recess gives the Soviets and their allies nearly two months to prepare a reply. The Vienna negotiations, known as Conventional Forces in Europe or CFE, have had a sporadic history stretching back more than 15 years. President Bush has insisted the imbalance in conventional forces -- the Warsaw Pact has a substantial edge in quantity if not quality over NATO -- must be addressed before talks are held on the elimination of short-range, or battlefield, nuclear weapons, as proposed by Gorbachev. Baker linked the decision to move quickly on arms control to Bush's visit to Poland and Hungary. "These efforts complement each other, and we think, together, advance the cause of a Europe which is whole and a Europe which is free." Baker insisted the timetable of an accord in a year is not unrealistic, pointing out that NATO is running 60 days ahead of its schedule. He rejected, meanwhile, a Soviet contention that another Bush timetable -- accomplishing the reductions by 1993 -- cannot be met. Baker said Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Horn had given assurances that the Warsaw Pact decided at a meeting last week not to let the quest for an agreement get bogged down in details. Baker today also praised the Soviets for accepting a U.S. proposal for trial monitoring of a still-unfinished strategic weapons limitation treaty. "We think it is very good that the Soviets have responded positively," Baker said. Despite complaints by several private American analysts that it is a stalling tactic, Baker said trial monitoring "might well move arms control forward rather than retarding it." The negotiations to cut long-range nuclear bombers, missiles and submarines by 30% to 50% are being held in Geneva. Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Viktor P. Karpov said Monday he accepted the Bush Administration's argument that the two sides could avoid misunderstandings by finishing trial weapons inspections before the agreement is concluded.
19891126000000000	ARMS CONTROL ISSUES LOOM OVER MALTA SUMMIT; DIPLOMACY: THE SUBJECT IS NOT OFFICIALLY ON THE AGENDA, BUT GORBACHEV MAY HAVE A SURPRISE FOR BUSH.. Even though arms control is not formally on the Malta summit agenda, some Bush Administration officials expect Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to make new offers to speed up the negotiations now under way on reducing long-range nuclear arms and non-nuclear weapons in Europe. But for Gorbachev, there is a significant risk, these officials say. Any such dramatic move could trigger a negative reaction from President Bush. Viewing it as grandstanding, the President is likely to respond by slowing the negotiations to prevent Gorbachev from stealing the credit for progress or by showing his displeasure in some other aspect of U.S.-Soviet relations. "One thing Gorbachev hasn't learned yet is not to play games with us in these kinds of circumstances," a senior State Department official said. "I suspect he'll play some game, either some big START (strategic nuclear arms) initiative . . . or some CFE (Conventional Forces in Europe) initiative plunked on the table -- all of it aimed at either getting us to buy it or look uncooperative and uncreative when we leave Malta." Not everyone expects a dramatic Gorbachev move. "This is not a summit in which you try something and want to run the risk of getting it thrown back in your face," one U.S. official said in discussing the likely Soviet approach to Malta. "This is a win-win summit. You do not want to risk bold steps that end up casting a pall over the meeting after it's over." Whatever Gorbachev's strategy at the summit, the concern of Administration officials about the potential impact of any step involving arms control -- long the centerpiece of U.S.-Soviet summits -- reflects the unique power that issue still has to force itself into the spotlight in a significant, even disruptive way. One factor pushing Gorbachev toward taking risks at Malta is that his political priorities may be different and his requirements more urgent than Bush's, particularly in the wake of the East European upheavals in the weeks since the Malta meeting was announced. Even before that, the Soviet leader clearly was more anxious for a START agreement than Bush has been, according to U.S. officials. Soviet negotiators also have acknowledged greater emphasis on START than on the CFE talks. While the Soviets admit that more savings can be achieved through conventional force cuts, according to American officials, they believe START will free more high-technology manpower for civilian work -- a critical element in reviving the Soviet economy. More subjective factors may also be in play, such as Soviet awareness that nuclear weapons pose a greater threat to their homeland than tanks and ground troops. Bush set ambitious deadlines of mid-1990 to complete both the START agreement, which would cut offensive nuclear arms by about 50%, and the CFE treaty, which would cut manpower, tanks and other weapons of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact to lower, equal ceilings. Soviet ground forces would be cut more than 50%, while NATO forces would be reduced about 10%. The almost unanimous view of U.S. officials, however, is that neither of the negotiations are likely to be completed by mid-1990. A few matters of principle still separate the U.S. and Soviet sides in START, but the delay results mainly from difficulties in ironing out technical details. With CFE, the United States and its European allies are still arguing about exactly what NATO should propose to the Warsaw Pact. Moreover, Bush did not express the timetable for finishing START very forcefully. He said he hoped the treaty would be ready by the time of the arms control summit that he and Gorbachev have scheduled for late next spring or early summer in the United States. Key U.S. arms negotiators said they did not interpret his words as marching orders. And while not ruling out completion by then, they said the START treaty would more likely be finished in late 1990 or early 1991, in time for signing at a third Bush-Gorbachev summit, expected to be held in the Soviet Union in mid-1991. Formal completion of START a year before the U.S. presidential elections has "a certain political logic to it," as one official said. Similarly, Bush in May called for a CFE agreement in six to 12 months. But his new chief negotiator at those Vienna talks, R. James Woolsey, later said the clock on that deadline did not begin running until September because four months were needed for NATO to convert Bush's words into a formal new proposal to the Warsaw Pact. As for CFE, even before the upheaval in Eastern Europe, the consensus among U.S. officials was that the conventional arms treaty would not be completed by mid-1990, as Bush initially envisioned. White House officials have offered only a 50-50 chance that the agreement will be finished even by the end of 1990, and some experts forecast completion in 1991. These conventional force talks are more complex than START in several respects. One major difficulty is defining what weapons to include in the proposed agreement and designing verification measures to police the treaty. A particular sticking point is the Warsaw Pact proposal to limit only "strike," or ground attack, warplanes, thereby excluding more than 5,000 of its warplanes because those aircraft are officially assigned air defense and training missions. Since the aircraft could in fact be used in offensive roles as well, NATO strongly opposes this approach. "If Gorbachev insists on his one-sided definition of aircraft," said Ronald Lehman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, "it's highly unlikely that we'll get a CFE treaty." Another complication, less tangible but equally significant, is that the CFE talks are bloc-to-bloc rather than one-on-one negotiations. Proposals must be coordinated in time-consuming consultations among the 16 NATO nations and seven Warsaw Pact countries. The NATO members have always been independent; the age-old animosity between Greeks and Turks continue to delay agreement on the NATO position, for example. Now, Soviet allies are becoming increasingly independent within the Warsaw Pact, and this is creating new problems for Gorbachev that are expected to be reflected in his maneuvering at Malta. "Gorbachev will push hard (at Malta) . . . to really rev up the CFE process quickly," one highly placed U.S. expert on Soviet affairs predicts, because "that negotiation is about to be overtaken by events in Eastern Europe. In some ways, it already has," he said, citing the end of "ideological coherence" in the Warsaw Pact nations and the increasing divergence from Moscow of the foreign and security policies of East European states. "There's still a window . . . probably a year or two" before the CFE negotiations become irrelevant, he added. Before the window of opportunity closes, Gorbachev would like to nail down the deal to help stabilize conditions in Eastern Europe and legitimize the Soviet presence there while the agreed force reductions are carried out, the official said. The best way for Gorbachev to speed up the CFE talks, he continued, would be to drop aircraft from the list of conventional weapons to be reduced. Moscow insisted on including aircraft in the first place, and it could now be the one to set the issue aside for subsequent talks. The Soviet leader may also try to speed up CFE by persuading Bush to ease U.S. verification demands for the treaty, thereby simplifying and smoothing the way to agreement. The Pentagon is insisting on tough measures that affect mainly West Europeans, whose territories lie in the Atlantic-to-the-Urals zone covered by the negotiations. The potential impact of verification inspections on U.S. facilities would be minimal. The West Europeans would prefer on-site inspections only after reductions have occurred, to ensure that no cheating occurs after the cuts, and would forgo monitoring the reductions as they occur. "The Soviets could live with the European view" on CFE verification measures, the official added, if Bush can overrule the Defense Department on the matter. In the START talks, Gorbachev may seek to give new impetus to the current negotiations by outlining his vision of the next phase of strategic talks -- START II, as some experts refer to them. An obvious proposal would be to call for a second 50% cut, which would reduce the arsenals of each superpower to 3,000 long-range offensive nuclear weapons. Or, if Gorbachev continues to hold utopian views on disarmament, he could expound on the goal of a "minimum deterrence" force of only 500 nuclear warheads on each side. "Just discussing broad goals for START II, and setting a schedule of ministerial talks (between Secretary of State James A. Baker III and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze), will increase pressure on the bureaucracies on both sides to finish START I," the official added. For beyond the well-known skepticism toward arms agreements in the Pentagon, U.S. negotiators in START believe the Soviet military is also foot-dragging in discernible ways. START I needs no huge breakthroughs to be completed, officials said, thanks largely to Soviet concessions in September. One or two important political issues need to be solved, however, and ideas may be exchanged at Malta on how to tackle them in preparation for the arms control summit next year, when they can be formally resolved. Most important of these issues is how many air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) will be attributed to each bomber. "We think it's not a treaty buster," said one U.S. official, both on its merits and because Gorbachev has said the ALCM issue is "ripe" for solution. Of the 6,000 offensive nuclear weapons permitted under START, no more than 4,900 can be warheads on ballistic missiles. The rest would be bombs and warheads on bombers and cruise missiles. Since aircraft are comparatively slow flying and recallable, the United States argues they are less threatening than ballistic warheads and that their construction should be encouraged in future forces. This can be done by "discounting" these weapons in the START treaty, i.e., counting ALCM-delivered warheads less than ballistic missile warheads. So the United States wants to "attribute" to each aircraft a fixed number of ALCMs -- 10 to the B-52, for example -- no matter how many they in fact carry. But the Soviets want to count every missile each bomber carries, which for the B-52 is as many as 22. Times staff writer Doyle McManus contributed to this story.
19900204000000000	BAKER TO OFFER NEW ARMS PROPOSALS; DIPLOMACY: THE PACKAGE WILL INCLUDE A COMPROMISE ON AIR-LAUNCHED CRUISE MISSILES.. Secretary of State James A. Baker III will take "a good package" of arms proposals to Moscow this week, including ideas that go beyond the agreed agenda, in an effort to complete the START nuclear weapons treaty this year, U.S. officials said Saturday. Baker, who leaves Monday for East Europe and the Soviet Union, will spend three days with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze discussing the START treaty, which would cut by half the number of offensive nuclear warheads in the superpower arsenals. In talks beginning Wednesday, Baker will offer a compromise to settle the longstanding issue of how to count air-launched cruise missiles and will propose a limit on the number of warheads that can be carried on mobile, land-based ballistic missiles, sources said. The Pentagon also wants Baker to propose counting some of the warheads on Soviet mobile missiles against the warhead limit on Soviet fixed, silo-based ICBMs -- the weapons most threatening to the United States in a nuclear war, according to officials. Whether President Bush and his top Cabinet officers agreed to the Pentagon proposal when they met Thursday was not known. But the consensus among officials and non-government experts familiar with the concept is that Moscow is unlikely to accept it because the restraints would affect only Soviet forces. The United States has no such mobile missiles at present. Baker, moreover, has opposed general calls by conservative politicians and arms experts to make radical new demands on the Soviets in the belief that they are "on the run" and would now accept offers they previously rejected. Instead, he has shunned proposals that might threaten to derail or delay significantly the START -- Strategic Arms Reduction Talks -- treaty. Both Bush and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev want to have the pact settled in principle at their next summit in June and fully completed by the end of 1990. The correct approach, Baker has said, is to "lock in" the treaty, already almost 90% completed, "while we have the opportunity," a reference to Gorbachev's apparent willingness to finish the process. In contrast with some previous negotiating sessions, the American team hopes to avoid disclosing many of its new ideas if they are unacceptable to the Soviets, in order not to create new obstacles or poison the atmosphere. "The aim this time will be to get results, not to demonstrate any 'bold new thinking' to the public," one official said Saturday. While strategic nuclear arms will be the main topic of the trip, Baker also is expected during his four-day stay in Moscow to provide greater detail about Bush's new proposal to slash U.S. and Soviet troop strength in Central and Eastern Europe. In his State of the Union address, Bush proposed ceilings of 195,000 troops for each nation in Central and Eastern Europe, but he also said the United States would retain an additional 30,000 troops in Britain, Turkey and Italy. The Kremlin, as expected, expressed opposition to the inequality built into the scheme even though, in principle, the Soviets could station 30,000 troops in southeastern European nations such as Romania and Bulgaria in addition to the 195,000 in Eastern Europe. That possibility, however, is considered unrealistic because those nations have never had Soviet forces and because of the ousting of pro-Soviet governments in the region's current upheaval. Moreover, according to one source, the Bush proposal would not bind the United States to a ceiling of 30,000 outside the so-called central zone in Europe. That figure is considered a "force projection," meaning an expectednumber that could be increased at will. Baker, who will meet with Gorbachev and appear before a foreign affairs committee of the Supreme Soviet legislative body later in the week, also is expected to discuss with Soviet leaders the implications of the continuing upheavals in former Soviet Bloc nations. German reunification, to which Gorbachev now appears to be less opposed than last month, will be a prime topic as both superpowers seek to keep the process of bringing East and West Germany together both gradual and peaceful. In addition to his sessions with Soviet officials, Baker will confer briefly with French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas during a refueling stop in Ireland, spend a day in Prague meeting with President Vaclav Havel and other leaders of the new government in Czechoslovakia, and stop in Ottawa, Canada, to attend a conference of North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact officials. But the centerpiece of the secretary of state's diplomatic excursion will be the START negotiations, where significant differences remain despite the large degree of agreement already achieved. Both sides already have agreed to a limit of 6,000 nuclear weapons, such as warheads, for each side. Of these, a maximum of 4,900 could be carried on ballistic missiles, with the rest on air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) and in bombers. Several other sub-limits of significance have been set. No more than 3,300 warheads could be carried on land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and no more than 1,540 could be on very large ICBMs. Only the Soviets have these "heavy" ICBMs, each of which carries 10 warheads. Baker is expected to propose another sub-limit of between 700 and 1,000 warheads on mobile land-based missiles. The Soviets already have rail-mobile and road-mobile missiles, while the United States is preparing to build both types. But in case Congress allows neither, the Pentagon wants Baker to propose that all multiple warheads on land-based missiles be counted against the 1,540 limit on "heavies." Baker also will seek to nail down what has been a very elusive "counting rule" for ALCMs carried on bombers. The United States wants to attribute a fixed number of ALCMs to all bombers of a certain kind, such as 10 ALCMs on every B-52. The Soviets, in contrast, want to count all the ALCMs that each bomber is equipped to carry, such as 20 for the B-52. The Pentagon strongly favors the U.S. counting proposal, in part because bombers seldom carry their maximum payload. Moreover, it does not know how many B-2 Stealth bombers Congress will allow it to buy. Those planes were to be used for penetration missions inside the Soviet Union. If significantly fewer B-2s are bought than initially planned, the military wants the flexibility to load more ALCMs on B-52s to make up for any B-2 shortfall. Baker is expected to propose a compromise in which, if the Soviets accept the U.S. counting principle, the United States would accept Soviet demands for a greater limitation on the range of the ALCMs. Moscow wanted all nuclear ALCMs with a range of more than 600 kilometers (375 miles) to be counted, while Washington wanted the range limit set at 1,500 kilometers (925 miles). A possible outcome, an official said, would be a slightly higher ALCM count, such as 12 for the B-52, in exchange for a range limit of 1,000 kilometers (500 miles) or even less.
19900417000000000	SOVIETS RAISE OBSTACLES TO NEW ARMS PACTS. The Soviet Union in recent weeks has been backing away from or qualifying a number of important arms control deals, including the agreement for a ceiling of 195,000 U.S. and Soviet troops in Central Europe, U.S. officials say. Officials and non-government experts blame the problem on a new assertiveness by the Soviet military. Worried about the nation's security as its East European alliance crumbles and a unified Germany emerges, the Red Army has pushed Moscow to reopen old issues that were considered settled and raised new ones to bedevil the negotiators. Unless Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev "cracks the whip soon," as one official put it last week, the new Soviet positions could prevent him and President Bush from agreeing in principle on the START nuclear arms reduction treaty at their May 30 summit meeting. They could also prolong negotiations on the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks beyond this year. Gorbachev and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze have tended to dismiss the new obstacles, many of which arose during Shevardnadze's visit here two weeks ago, as minor problems that crop up inevitably in the closing phases of negotiations. But U.S. officials are concerned that they may present serious new difficulties, and they fear that the rising influence of the Soviet Defense Ministry may not be a passing phenomenon. "A danger to Gorbachev exists in the potential coalescing of three very unhappy groups in the Soviet Union," explained a senior U.S. analyst. "The nomenklatura (privileged party and government bureaucrats); Russian nationalists, particularly in the non-Russian republics, and the military. "He's being extra careful now not to alienate any of them, taking greater account particularly of the military's positions," the official added. "It's an open question how long it will last." "There's no doubt that the CFE negotiations have been slowed down by German unification," according to Harvard Prof. Joseph Nye, an arms control expert, who said that the Soviets see the CFE as their best means for controlling German armament. "It's implausible that they would set limits on U.S. and Soviet forces and not on the unified German army as well." Echoing this view, Jack Mendelsohn, deputy director of the private Arms Control Assn., said, "The Soviets don't care where the question of unified Germany's forces will be settled -- at CFE or the 'two-plus-four' talks on German unification -- but they want a handle on it as their first priority." Secretary of State James A. Baker III believed that all of the CFE troop issues had been settled in Ottawa in February. At that time, the superpowers agreed that each could station up to 195,000 soldiers in the central zone of Europe -- mainly in East and West Germany -- and the United States could have an extra 30,000 around the periphery of the Continent. But later, the Soviets, at the CFE talks in Vienna, said the 195,000 figure was contingent on establishing an overall ceiling of all forces in the central region, not just those belonging to the United States and the Soviet Union. More specifically, they want a limit of 750,000 troops for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, including all West German, American and other allied troops, and an equal limit on the Warsaw Pact. Moscow made little effort to hide the fact that its larger purpose was to use the CFE negotiations to set a limit on the forces of a unified Germany, which seems likely to become part of NATO. The West German military consists of about 450,000 men and women, while East Germany has had about 150,000 in its armed forces, for an all-German total of about 600,000. The Soviets want a unified Germany to have no more than 300,000 troops. When the United States complained that the Soviets were reneging on the Ottawa agreement, Moscow backtracked to accept the 195,000-troop ceiling as firm for U.S. and Soviet forces, U.S. officials said. But its CFE negotiators continue to insist that an overall ceiling of about 750,000 be set for each side in the central zone. The central region includes West Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, East Germany, Poland and Czechoslovakia. The U.S. position is that such a ceiling should be negotiated in future CFE talks. U.S. officials also refuse to allow the issue of personnel to be raised within the "two-plus-four" talks because it would smack of imposing a troop ceiling on the unified Germany. The "two-plus-four" talks involve East and West Germany and the four major victors in World War II: Britain, France, the United States and the Soviet Union. Nye argues that the German unification issue has also made the Soviet military skittish on the START treaty, which Bush and Gorbachev promised to initial at the May 30-June 3 summit and then formally sign later this year. But most U.S. officials believe Soviet reversals on nuclear issues are more a reflection of the longstanding objections of the Soviet military to some START terms, as well as a new effort to limit the threat of U.S. cruise missiles. The Soviet military has also complained that it was not represented at a key U.S.-Soviet meeting in Moscow in February when major Soviet concessions were made, according to knowledgeable U.S. officials. In particular, it now insists that Marshall Sergei F. Akhromeyev, former army chief of staff but now Gorbachev's military adviser, no longer represents the Soviet military chiefs when he attends negotiations, as he did in February. In a small but embarrassing example, Akhromeyev in February agreed that U.S. B-52 bombers could carry up to 20 air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) but that they be counted against the START weapon ceilings as if they carried only 10 ALCMs. U.S. negotiators then proposed that Soviet bombers, which are somewhat smaller, could carry 16 ALCMs but only be counted as carrying eight weapons. Akhromeyev waved aside the offer of 16, saying the Soviet bombers could carry a maximum of 12. Surprised, U.S. diplomats agreed that the number should be 12. Now the Soviets want the right to carry up to 16 missiles on their bombers. The U.S. side will agree, since it proposed that number initially. Other Soviet changes were not so benign. Until now, the Soviets had agreed that only those bombers equipped to carry nuclear weapons were to count against the START ceilings. Now the Soviets want to count all heavy bombers, including those configured to carry only conventional bombs or even electronic gear. The Soviets also proposed for the first time that within the overall START ceiling of 6,000 nuclear weapons, a sub-ceiling be put on the number of ALCMs and ALCM-carrying bombers. Until now, START sub-ceilings have been only for the more dangerous ballistic missile warheads, and each side would have been free to opt for more ALCMS by cutting back on ballistic missile warheads. The most egregious of the Soviet reversals, however, deals with sea-launched cruise missiles (SLCMs), which are not formally part of the START agreement but which are to be handled in parallel with that treaty. In February, the Soviets agreed that each side would make a public declaration of how many weapons it intended to build. Now the Soviets want a legally binding agreement, a ceiling on the number that may be built and verification provisions to ensure compliance, U.S. officials said. A final issue that could complicate the START talks in the next six weeks is the possibility of banning multiple warhead (or MIRV) missiles. In a personal letter to Gorbachev last month, Bush proposed that land-based, mobile MIRV missiles be eliminated from both arsenals. This would eliminate the 10-warhead Soviet SS-24 missiles that are carried in railroad cars and prevent deployment of the 10-warhead U.S. MX missiles on railroad cars. Gorbachev did not reject or accept the proposal per se, according to officials, although he noted that MIRV missiles on submarines are also mobile. "He just seemed to be saying, 'Don't complicate my life with this issue now,' " one U.S. official said.
19900527000000000	GORBACHEV'S WOES TO SHAPE SUMMIT; DIPLOMACY: PRESIDENT BUSH MAY WANT TO CONCENTRATE ON OLDER ARMS CONTROL ISSUES, BUT THE TROUBLED SOVIET LEADER'S INTERNAL AGENDA COULD BE MORE PRESSING.. Marking a watershed between the Cold War and post-Cold War eras, this week's U.S.-Soviet summit will have a two-part agenda: It will cover "old" business, especially arms control, and "new" business, particularly the shape of a more unified Europe. President Bush's first priority will be to focus on the old issues. "We want to get these deals finalized," he said of agreements made in the strategic arms reduction talks (START) and other arms negotiations. "I don't want to have two ships pass in the night." Bush's priorities may be overshadowed, however, by internal developments in the Soviet Union -- Lithuania's drive for independence and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reluctance to undertake radical economic reforms in the face of increasing social unrest. "Serious instability in the Soviet Union is much more thinkable than it was six months ago," when Bush and Gorbachev last met, a senior Administration official said. Specifically, summer strikes could ex acerbate the increasing ethnic battles, hoarding and struggles for independence, he added. "To a degree that we have never seen before, this summit and U.S.-Soviet relations are affected by preoccupations by Soviet domestic affairs," the official argued. Even the personal rapport between Bush and Gorbachev may have changed since their Malta meeting in December. Asked whether their relationship had cooled, Bush said last week: "I'll have to wait and see." The new circumspection reflects both uncertainty about Gorbachev's true situation and a division within the Administration over a fundamental question of strategy: While all agree that Bush is heading into this summit holding the best hand of cards of any recent U.S. President in a meeting of this kind, some U.S. officials think he should now distance himself from the Kremlin leader and begin embracing some of Gorbachev's opponents, who favor faster democratization and economic reform. For this summit, at least, the President's answer is "not yet." Bush will continue to link U.S. interests with the success of Gorbachev's perestroika program of political and economic restructuring, U.S. officials said. According to Secretary of State James A. Baker III, the single most important priority of this week's summit will be to break the impasse over slashing conventional forces in Europe (referred to as CFE) -- the armed forces of the Warsaw Pact and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization -- that have faced each other across the Iron Curtain for 45 years. The Soviets appear to be having second thoughts about the CFE reductions, which call for roughly four times as many cuts by the Warsaw Pact as by the NATO alliance. They also are beginning to balk at a proposed requirement that any discarded equipment -- more than 100,000 tanks and other weapons on the Soviet side -- be destroyed rather than just withdrawn. "Those CFE negotiations were begun two years ago, a vastly different time -- on a different planet, almost -- before the Warsaw Pact and the entire Soviet position in East Europe collapsed," one Administration analyst said. "The Soviets have to convince themselves, or be convinced, that they will be better off with a treaty than without it. It will be a close call whether they buy it (the CFE treaty) now." Difficult as it may be for him to accept, Gorbachev's willingness to go ahead with the CFE treaty is seen by Washington as the "litmus test of Soviet intentions" for the new Europe. If Moscow refuses to go forward with the deal, it will "send a bad signal," Bush told a news conference here last week. But the bargaining is not going easily. Earlier this month, Baker took Moscow a package of ideas for resolving outstanding CFE issues and offered to present them to NATO to use as the basis for alliance-wide proposals for the talks. The Soviets showed no interest. According to one official, Bush will tell Gorbachev that completion of a CFE accord is the "fundamental precondition" for moving ahead on proposals that the Soviets want, ranging from an all-European summit and a push toward a European-wide security system to cuts in NATO short-range nuclear weapons in Europe. "He won't expect Gorbachev to compromise on the spot on aircraft, tanks and the other categories," the official said. "And he'll say we understand Soviet concerns and are prepared to seek reasonable compromises. But what he wants is a new impetus given to the negotiations." Closely linked to conventional force cuts is the question of where a newly united Germany will fit. Bush hopes to persuade Gorbachev that a reunified Germany should remain a member of NATO, within its integrated command structure, as the best way to control the powerful new state emerging in the center of Europe. But Gorbachev opposes participation by a unified Germany in NATO's military structure and wants to place a ceiling on German military strength before unification takes place. He also wants a breathing space of several years before the Soviets must withdraw their forces from East Germany. And the Soviets want major economic help from West Germany as part of the price for accepting East Germany's absorption by the West. A second set of summit issues will deal with completion of the bilateral arms agreements that have been under negotiation for so long. Although some key issues remain outstanding, the two leaders are expected to announce agreement on the fundamental principles of the START nuclear treaty. The accord, which calls for cutting the offensive nuclear arsenals of the two nations by one-third to one-half over the next seven years, should be ready for signing before year's end. Bush and Gorbachev also will initial an agreement to begin dismantling their chemical weapon arsenals -- although details on verification must still be worked out. They also will sign protocols that should bring into force two old treaties limiting the power of underground nuclear weapon tests. Third on the agenda will be regional or Third World issues, such as ending the conflict in Afghanistan. Finally, Baker said, will be "the area of human rights and democratization" -- a much-broadened category that enables the United States to bring up not just emigration and the plight of political prisoners but also Baltic independence and demands for greater autonomy by Soviet republics. These are issues that Moscow could otherwise contend are strictly internal affairs. Baker predicted that Bush will spend "a good bit of time" discussing Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, "emphasizing that their right to self-determination cannot be denied." Bush also will seek to go over the economic situation in the Soviet Union, which U.S. experts believe is on the brink of serious decline -- certain to get worse before it gets better. Ed A. Hewett, a Brookings Institution expert who briefed Bush on the Soviet economy last week, blames Gorbachev for five wasted years of inadequate reforms. The Soviet leader is finally facing up to the need for a coherent program, he said, but meanwhile "the population has lost faith in the leadership's ability to do anything well." Beyond the formal agenda items, what is being called "the flavor of the summit" will be affected primarily by Lithuania and the growing political and economic turmoil inside the Soviet Union. Lithuania's March 11 declaration of independence is fast replacing Jewish emigration as perhaps the most rancorous issue in U.S.-Soviet relations. Under pressure from Baltic supporters here, key members of Congress have told the White House that most-favored-nation (MFN) trading status for Moscow would be "a hard sell" as long as Gorbachev bullies Lithuania. However, Gorbachev's retrenchment on domestic reforms may be an even more significant factor in deciding whether U.S.-Soviet relations will deteriorate in the future. With the outlook worsening daily, the Administration is coming under increasing pressure to begin distancing itself from Gorbachev on other issues as well. Hard-liners argue that Gorbachev's train has run out of steam and that more democratic forces among Gorbachev's critics in the Soviet Union deserve added American support. The question now is not whether Gorbachev will last, one senior Administration analyst said, but "can he stay relevant?" And, he added, "Can he manage what he's unleashed?" The debate within the Administration has surfaced publicly in comments by non-government experts on Soviet affairs. "We have too many eggs in one basket," complained Dmitri Simes, a Soviet specialist at the Carnegie Endowment. He compared the Administration's "friendly obsession" with Gorbachev just as the Soviet leader is losing ground at home to U.S. support for Egypt's late President Anwar Sadat a decade ago just before Sadat, who made peace with Israel, was assassinated. Simes said the United States, by identifying closely with Gorbachev, is losing credibility with Soviet political forces that are demanding more democracy and free-market reforms than Gorbachev is proposing. And, Simes added, it is also losing credibility with the Lithuanians and other ethnic groups seeking independence. But others point out that, if the United States switched support to national independence movements and more radical democratic forces in the Soviet Union, American policy could become hostage to a long, bitter and possibly bloody process now under way there -- one that is far more important to the Kremlin than the dissidents and refuseniks of the 1970s ever were. Fairway PRESIDENCY: Rest and relaxation top Bush's pre-summit agenda. A11 PRE-SUMMIT TALKS TO SEEK A NUCLEAR PACT DRAFT; WEAPONS: SOVIETS ARRIVE IN WASHINGTON FOR FINAL PREPARATORY SESSION. BOTH SIDES HOPE TO RESTART STALLED NEGOTIATIONS ON CONVENTIONAL FORCES.; THE WASHINGTON SUMMIT. DEALING WITH THE NEW REALITY. Soviet negotiators arrived in the United States on Saturday for a final pre-summit round of arms talks, seeking to eliminate the last obstacles to a draft nuclear weapons agreement and to restart stalled talks on conventional armed forces in Europe. The head of the Soviet delegation, arms control expert Viktor P. Karpov, told reporters that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev plans to seek limits on the military power of a reunified Germany when he meets with President Bush beginning Thursday. "We need some guarantees that this new Germany will respect European security and that the armed forces of the new state will be under some control," he said. U.S. officials said they are optimistic that the two sides can work through the remaining issues in the nuclear strategic arms reduction talks (START) when they begin meeting today. Bush and Gorbachev are scheduled to approve its terms in a declaration this week. "We're just about there," said a senior Administration official, noting that the remaining problems in the proposed START accord are "not major policy issues." On conventional arms, U.S. officials said they hope for a positive Soviet response to several compromise proposals made by Secretary of State James A. Baker III in Moscow two weeks ago. The talks on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) have been at an impasse for months while Moscow reconsidered its security posture after the collapse of Eastern Europe's Communist regimes. The negotiations are intended to produce a treaty under which the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact would make deep cuts in troops, aircraft, armored vehicles and artillery. In Moscow, Baker took the Soviets a package of U.S. "ideas" intended to explore Soviet flexibility and re-energize the negotiations, but he received no concrete response. Officials said the U.S. suggestions covered most of the issues on which NATO and the Soviets are at odds in the talks: limits on aircraft and armored forces, destruction of weapons that are withdrawn, manpower ceilings for each alliance and verification procedures. One major issue stems in part from Soviet worries that a reunified Germany might become a major military power again. The Kremlin has proposed a troop ceiling of about 750,000 on each alliance, a provision that would have the effect of constraining German troop levels. Previously, the United States had argued that no such limits were necessary. But in his recent Moscow meetings, Baker hinted at a new, more flexible U.S. position, according to one official. He said Baker told the Soviets that NATO would attempt to "accommodate Soviet concerns about German force levels in the current (CFE) negotiations or later." In START negotiations, half a dozen "second-order" issues remain to be resolved: * Warheads on mobile land-based missiles. The United States has backed off its longstanding proposal to ban all land-based mobile multiple-warhead missiles, so now both sides are trying to set a limit on the warheads carried by mobile launchers. * Limits on the Soviet Union's modernization of its heavy SS-18 missile. The United States had proposed banning production and flight tests of these weapons. The Soviets already have agreed to halve their SS-18 force from 308 to 154; but during the eight-year course of the START negotiations, they have also developed an improved version, called Mod 5. The new U.S. proposal is to limit flight testing and end production of the Mod 5, but Moscow has shown no interest in that. * The Soviets' Backfire bomber. Moscow refuses to include these under the START limits because it says they are medium-range aircraft, not long-range. The United States wants them included but may drop the issue. * Perimeter and portal monitoring. The two sides disagree on the kinds and numbers of nuclear weapon facilities where on-site inspectors from each side would police operations. * Non-circumvention. START bans both countries from giving the weapons limited by the pact to other countries, but the United States wants to maintain a longstanding program to help Britain develop sea-based nuclear forces. The Soviets are expected to agree. * "Follow-on" negotiations. At the summit, Bush and Gorbachev are expected to issue a joint statement promising to follow the START treaty with START-2 talks. But the two sides haven't agreed on what should be included in the next negotiations. The United States wants to reduce the Soviet arsenal of SS-18s and ballistic missiles with multiple warheads; the Soviets want more limits on air- and sea-launched cruise missiles. Arms control experts predict the statement will be vague, leaving the question of the START-2 agenda to be worked out later.
19900602000000000	THE WASHINGTON SUMMIT; NEWS ANALYSIS; START PACT MAY FOOL CRITICS OF ARMS CONTROL; TREATY: THE AGREEMENTS MARK THE BEGINNING OF THE CRITICAL TASK OF DISMANTLING 'OVER-ARMAMENT' THAT ACCUMULATED DURING FOUR DECADES OF CONFRONTATION.. Critics of arms control have long complained that "when it's important, it's not do-able, and when it's do-able, it's not important." But President Bush and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev took a significant step Friday toward proving the critics wrong. The agreements that they signed on strategic nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and nuclear testing, along with a joint statement advancing prospects for conventional force cuts in Europe, mark the beginning of the critical task of dismantling the "over-armament" of both nuclear and conventional weapons that accumulated during four decades of confrontation. "The START treaty will signal a turning point in U.S.-Soviet arms control efforts toward a more rational, open, cooperative, predictable and stable relationship," the two leaders said in a statement accompanying the agreement. Said Bush: "The world has waited long enough. The Cold War must end." The START pact, in particular, will cut in half the number of missile warheads, the most dangerous weapons on both sides, and the reductions will be verified by 13 different types of on-site inspection. Also, it switches the weight of the arsenals from fast-flying ballistic warheads to slow-flying cruise missile warheads. "No one is going to start a war by using cruise missiles," said former arms negotiator Paul C. Warnke. Beyond that, START could significantly increase political stability between the two countries, according to Harvard Prof. Joseph S. Nye, Jr. "The basic objective of arms control," he said, "has been to promote stability, with reduced risk of conflict and some money saving. START, as it emerges, does advance those goals and thus sets the stage for the next steps in the process, including deeper cuts in nuclear weapons." "Maybe this disarmament process is a victim of its own success," said Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov, tacitly acknowledging the grumbling of critics over Friday's arms agreements. "We used to talk a lot about disarmament, and now when we have disarmament we talk less. "It doesn't mean that it has less significance," Gerasimov added, referring to the anticipated START pact. "It's extremely significant. It also gives you and us a peace dividend." Certainly critics can argue that there is room for improvement in the accords: The cuts could have been deeper, negotiations less protracted. But they set the stage, militarily and politically, for the next steps in slowing down the arms race. The START agreement will cut offensive nuclear arsenals by one-third overall, not by the flat 50% once promised. And it will take seven years to get the weapon stockpiles back to roughly their size when the strategic arms reduction talks began in 1982. But even some who are disappointed at the "modest" size of the cuts, like Warnke, a former arms negotiator, see the treaty as a "useful" step. The anticipated treaty to cut conventional forces in Europe (CFE) has generally drawn less criticism. The Warsaw Pact countries would cut four times more weapons from their arsenals than the North Atlantic Treaty Organization: 15% to 60% of various weapon categories, compared to 7% to 15% for NATO. Instead of taking eight years to negotiate, CFE promises to be finished in only two. But here, too, critics complain that history has moved faster than arms control and that the weapon and troop ceilings set by the agreement could become the floors that the Soviets will insist upon retaining in East Europe in the future. Barring some drastic reversal of the present flow of events, however, there seems little realistic prospect that any significant Soviet presence will remain in the former Soviet Bloc countries by the end of the treaty's seven-year reduction period. Hungary and Czechoslovakia will be rid of the Soviets by mid-1991. Poland may or may not allow small contingents of Soviet logistic troops to stay to service Soviet forces in East Germany. But with German unification imminent, Soviet troops can only be marking time on East German territory before they depart. The CFE treaty, further, will require the destruction of massive amounts of weapons -- over 100,000 tanks, artillery and aircraft by the Warsaw Pact. Reconstituting them in order to go to war would be very costly and time-consuming, and probably could not be done without alerting the West. So the CFE accord should largely blow away the specter of a big conventional war in Europe for decades. As such, it will have more immediate impact on the Continent than will the START pact. But the superpowers will still be overstocked with nuclear weapons whose use, while far less likely, can obliterate the world. Hence new negotiations, to quickly follow completion of the START treaty, will seek "to enhance stability and reduce the risk of war," Bush said at Friday's White House signing ceremony. Arms control experts have a more specific list than that already prepared. A primary goal should be to reduce the weapon totals further, to 3,000 or 4,000 weapons, according to Harvard's Nye. The START treaty now anticipated will permit 6,000 "accountable" weapons, but it will actually permit 9,000 or slightly more because of liberal counting rules for cruise missiles. The next treaty should set a limit that will have no loopholes, Nye said. The new talks are certain to seek strict limits on the number of land-based intercontinental missiles with multiple warheads. Both U.S. and Soviet officials agree that such missiles are destabilizing: They are the best weapons to launch a surprise attack, and also the most attractive targets in a surprise attack. Another goal will be further cuts in the very large Soviet ICBM missiles, the SS-18s, whose power and accuracy are the most threatening to the United States. Curbs on nuclear weapons in naval forces will be a topic pushed by the Soviets in future talks, because they fear that nuclear weapons on U.S. submarines and ships can circumvent the START treaty.  COUNTING NUCLEAR WARHEADS The goal of the START agreement under negotiation is to reduce the nuclear arsenal of each superpower below 6,000 warheads. Below are current and anticipated levels by 1998, including intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) and nuclear devices carried on bombers. ICBMs Currents levels United States: 2,450 Soviet Union: 6,450 Post-START levels United States: 1,800 Soviet Union: 3,050  SLBMs Currents levels United States: 5,024 Soviet Union: 3,642 Post-START levels United States: 3,024 Soviet Union: 1,848  BOMBERS Currents levels United States: 4,500 Soviet Union: 1,228 Post-START levels United States: 1,083 Soviet Union: 1,085  TOTAL Currents levels United States: 11,974 Soviet Union: 11,320 Post-START levels United States: 5,907 Soviet Union: 5,983 Source: Natural Resources Defense Council
19901004000000000	U.S., SOVIETS IRON OUT DETAILS OF EUROPEAN ARMS PACT; MILITARY: AN 'AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE' IS REACHED ON CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS. AS A BONUS, PROGRESS IS MADE ON SLASHING LONG-RANGE NUCLEAR ARMS.. Secretary of State James A. Baker III and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze announced an "agreement in principle" Wednesday on a treaty slashing the numbers of tanks, artillery and other conventional weapons in Europe. The agreement still needs the approval of Washington's 15 North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies and Moscow's five remaining Warsaw Pact allies, but Baker said he hopes the treaty will be ready for signature next month at a European summit meeting in Paris. Baker and Shevardnadze refused to divulge details of the agreement in advance of presentation to allied nations. But Baker said the pact will result in the destruction of "a significant amount of armaments." U.S. officials have said that the emerging treaty will reduce Warsaw Pact weaponry by about 60%, eliminating more than 100,000 weapons, including more than 40,000 tanks. It will reduce NATO's substantially smaller arsenal by about 10%, or 15,000 weapons. The Conventional Forces in Europe talks, which began in Vienna on March 8, 1989, are technically between the member nations of the rival military alliances. However, it is inconceivable that either NATO or the Warsaw Pact would reject an agreement that was acceptable to both Moscow and Washington. When the negotiations began last year, the Warsaw Pact consisted of the Soviet Union and six Communist-governed nations that followed Moscow's lead in foreign policy and military planning. Now, the size of the pact has shrunk with the disappearance of East Germany. Of the remaining nations, three -- Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland -- have jettisoned communism completely and two -- Bulgaria and Romania -- have ousted old-line Communist dictators. "So far as U.S.-Soviet discussions are concerned, we have been able to reach mutual understanding on all major issues," Shevardnadze said. "I am sure our allies will be able to agree with us." Baker and Shevardnadze spent most of their six-hour meeting at the headquarters of the Soviet U.N. Mission on completing the conventional weapons talks. However, Shevardnadze said they also made "substantial progress" toward a new agreement slashing the superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear weapons. Baker flew back to Washington late Wednesday but he said he might return to New York on Friday to continue talks on a strategic arms reduction treaty before Shevardnadze returns to Moscow this weekend. President Bush and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev have set a goal of completing the nuclear weapons treaty before the end of this year. But Baker said the two sides are on a "very short time leash" concerning the conventional weapons talks. The United States has said that it will not attend the Conference on Security and Cooperation summit meeting, scheduled for Paris on Nov. 19-21, unless a conventional arms pact is ready to be signed there. Most of the most significant issues in the conventional arms talks were settled earlier. For instance, the two sides agreed to limit the army of reunified Germany to 370,000 men, down from 600,000 just a year ago. The pact will not impose manpower limits on any other armies, because the United States and the Soviet Union were unable to agree on ceilings for U.S. troops after the Soviets agreed, in talks with their allies, to withdraw all Soviet soldiers from Eastern Europe within four years. Baker said it is still possible that glitches in the formal drafting process could upset the agreement, but he said that was unlikely. Shevardnadze said he and Baker agreed to all remaining matters relating to aircraft, which had been the final sticking point, with the exception of a minor issue relating to helicopters. He predicted that lower-level negotiators would straighten out that problem without requiring additional action by the foreign ministers. "We agreed that the question of (Soviet) land-based naval aircraft, which was one of the real sticking points, would be handled by a politically binding declaration" outside of the formal language of the treaty, Baker said. Although neither Baker nor Shevardnadze would discuss details of the final negotiations, Shevardnadze said with a smile: "Of course, the Soviet Union made all of the main concessions."
19901113000000000	REGIONAL OUTLOOK; DRINKING A TOAST TO EUROPE'S FUTURE; THE CENTERPIECE OF THE PARTY WILL BE THE SIGNING OF A PACT REDUCING CONVENTIONAL FORCES. WILL SUCH TREATIES BE PASSE IN THE NEW EUROPE'S FUTURE?. It will be a coming-out party for the New Europe, and the guests are to leave most of their weapons at the door. Amid the splendor of a 34-nation summit meeting in Paris next week, members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact countries are to sign a historic treaty reducing the number of conventional forces -- tanks, artillery, and aircraft -- that both sides have stationed in Europe. The landmark accord formally recognizes the end of the Cold War-era threat posed by the military forces of the former Soviet Bloc, which has disintegrated in the wake of the recent changes in Soviet foreign policy. But the agreement comes amid political crosscurrents that raise serious questions about whether arms negotiations such as these have much of a future. Actual events -- such as the moves by the newly emerging East European democracies to expel remaining Soviet forces from their countries -- have been outpacing the negotiations. And with the Cold War over, there is less anxiety about war and, to some extent, less sense of urgency about traditional arms control efforts. The treaty limiting Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) provides for the Soviet Union and its former East European allies to slash their European arsenals by 40% -- and for NATO to cut its European forces by 3% -- to comply with new equal arms ceilings on both sides of the now-fallen Iron Curtain. According to the agreement, most of the surplus equipment must be destroyed, and each side will be authorized to conduct on-site inspections to verify that the other is complying with the terms of the treaty. And together with the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) agreement expected early next year, the CFE pact represents a milestone from which to view both the record of arms control negotiations to date and their prospects reaching into the 21st Century.  The Background Arms control has been central to U.S.-Soviet relations for more than a generation, and invariably has been controversial. The first U.S.-Soviet arms control treaty, in 1963, banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, space and oceans. It succeeded in limiting radioactive contamination of the environment and demonstrated that the superpowers could begin to slow the arms race, if not stop it altogether. A decade later, in 1972, the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, known as SALT I, established ceilings on long-range nuclear missiles and bombers. But the limits that it set were higher than either side's actual arsenal, thereby legalizing a further arms buildup. A second strategic treaty in 1979, SALT II, called for minor reductions by the Soviet Union. But it contained a major loophole: Although the pact limited the number of missiles each side could have, it did not restrict the number of warheads each missile could carry. As a result, by taking advantage of new multiple-warhead technology, the superpowers were able during the 1980s to quadruple the number of strategic warheads they had targeted on one another atop essentially the same number of missiles. By contrast, the START accord now nearing completion is to be the first strategic arms treaty to actually reduce the total number of weapons that the two sides have amassed -- by 30% overall, with a 50% cut in the most threatening ballistic missile warheads. Negotiations to cut conventional weapons arsenals in Europe also have a checkered history. Talks between NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations achieved virtually nothing in 15 years before they were superseded by the CFE negotiations in 1988. Even the new CFE treaty, which provides for the largest negotiated arms reductions in world history, has drawn its share of criticism. Skeptics say it has taken far too long and in itself moved only marginally toward making the world a safer place. In some cases, the negotiations have been overtaken by events. Last February, for example, negotiators set manpower limits of 195,000 each for U.S. and Soviet troops in the central zone of Europe. But by July, those ceilings were obsolete. The new East European governments and the reunited Germany are forcing all Soviet forces out of the region by 1994. As a result, the manpower limits were dropped out of the treaty; only weapons will be affected by the pact. Arms talks can also delay cuts that a country wants to make on its own. Soviet officials say part of the reason that Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced unilateral cuts of half a million troops in 1988 was that he feared that leaving such reductions to negotiations would actually delay their implementation. Similarly, U.S. officials speculate that if the United States had tried to negotiate the withdrawal of thousands of short-range nuclear warheads from Europe a decade ago rather than unilaterally bringing them home as it has, the weapons might still be there.  The Debate How much can the world expect from arms control negotiations? Are they worth the effort? After studying the impact of arms-control talks over the past three decades, Harvard University professors Albert Carnesale and Richard Haass conclude that "what emerges above all is the modesty of what arms control has wrought. "If the history reveals anything, it is that arms control has proven neither as promising as some had hoped (in saving money and reducing tensions) nor as dangerous as others had feared (in lulling the Western public into accepting Soviet superiority)," they write. Kenneth L. Adelman, a former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, gives an even harsher verdict. The big change in global security has come "not from arms negotiations, but from changes in the Soviet Union -- as we saw in the summer of 1989 when the Soviet threat ended," Adelman argues. "It had nothing to do with arms control." Supporters counter that Adelman expects too much of arms control. Jack Mendelsohn of the private Arms Control Assn. admits that the process has its shortcomings, but he notes that unilateral cuts do not provide for verification, for ensuring against reintroduction of forces, or for monitoring destruction of the weapons. Moreover, proponents argue that arms-control agreements too often are judged on their technical merits rather than their political significance in bridge-building between the superpowers. For example, the U.S.-Soviet INF treaty of 1987 -- to eliminate medium-range nuclear missiles -- was insignificant militarily. The Soviets reduced their arsenal by 1,667 warheads, or only about 5% of their stockpile. The United States cut was 429 warheads, less than 2%. "But the political significance of the INF agreement -- the improvement in the U.S.-Soviet relationship in the second half of the Ronald Reagan Administration -- far outweighed the technical problems related to the details of military doctrine," foreign policy specialist Joseph S. Nye Jr. wrote in Foreign Affairs magazine. Finally, the importance of arms-control mechanisms to limit proliferation to Third World nations -- and of U.S. and Soviet example-setting to spur the process -- will grow rather than diminish as East-West tensions abate.  The Outlook The consensus is that despite its faults, arms-control efforts will continue -- but with a significant shift in their scope and direction. Last year, experts were forecasting another extended, wide-ranging strategic arms negotiation -- to be called START II -- that might seek to halve again the number of offensive nuclear warheads. Instead of the 8,000 to 9,000 warheads that would be permitted under START I, the talks would seek to set a limit of perhaps 4,000 warheads. And the loopholes and defects in the present agreement might be eliminated in the process. But key Administration officials now believe that the flaws in START I should be attacked first in narrower negotiations, and that the most destabilizing weapons -- land-based missiles with multiple warheads, most capable of surprise attack -- should get top priority. U.S. officials also want to focus on making nuclear arsenals more stable -- a goal that might be better served by agreement to ban multiple warheads on new missiles than by another drastic reduction in the number of U.S. and Soviet weapons. Another high U.S. priority will be talks to ensure who has physical control over nuclear weapons in times of crisis. Officials are especially concerned about how well Soviet nuclear weapons can be safeguarded from dissidents and terrorists during times of domestic unrest. A similar shift on the conventional arms control agenda may occur. Negotiators already are committed to follow-on talks to deal with the troop-levels issue, which has been excluded from the CFE treaty. But U.S. officials would prefer that any new negotiations emphasize new "confidence-building measures," such as including more visits by foreign observers to military maneuvers and reducing the size of the maneuvering forces (now 13,000 men) that may be subject to inspection visits. Washington also is likely to press for an "open skies" agreement that would permit inspection overflights by aircraft that are equipped with the most advanced electronic sensing gear. Finally, high on the new arms control agenda will be efforts to expand and intensify multinational cooperation to prevent further proliferation of chemical and nuclear weapon technology -- and delivery vehicles such as ballistic missiles -- by Third World nations. While Iraq is the main threat today, U.S. officials are only slightly less worried about nuclear war between Pakistan and India, North Korea's growing potential to build nuclear devices, and Iran's desire to match whatever Iraq does.  Cutting Back on Conventional Arms HELICOPTERS NATO treaty cuts: -11% Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -44% Treaty limits: 2,000 AIRCRAFT NATO treaty cuts: 0% Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -31% Treaty limits: 7,000 TANKS NATO treaty cuts: -10% Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -46% Treaty limits: 20,000 ARTILLERY NATO treaty cuts: 0% Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -37% Treaty limits: 20,000 ARMORED VEHICLES NATO treaty cuts: 0% Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -36% Treaty limits: 30,000 Source: Arms Control Assn., NATO, U.S. Department of Defense
19901115000000000	WARSAW PACT, NATO AGREE TO ARMS TREATY. NATO and the Warsaw Pact agreed in principle today to a treaty drastically slashing their Cold War arsenals of non-nuclear weapons, delegates said. The 22 nations represented at the Conventional Forces in Europe talks then began cleaning up the 200-page text, which sets ceilings on the number of weapons each alliance can hold. The treaty, the first covering conventional arms since World War II, is to be formally initialed in Vienna on Sunday and signed a day later in Paris at a 34-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Agreement on the treaty, far from certain as recently as a few weeks ago, clears the way to full participation at the Paris summit. The United States had said it would not attend unless the treaty was certain to be approved. Under the treaty, described as the most far-reaching and complex arms accord ever negotiated, each alliance will be limited to 20,000 tanks, 30,000 armored cars, 20,000 artillery pieces, 6,800 combat aircraft and 2,000 attack helicopters. The ceilings will be divided between four zones in the area under negotiation, a vast tract of 2.3 million square miles stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals. Under the overall ceilings, each country will have its own national limit. To reach these ceilings, nations will have to scrap or convert to peaceful use a quarter of a million arms, in some cases up to half of current stocks. Moscow will have to get rid of 19,000 tanks to meet the new limit. Talks will start immediately after the summit on a second-stage agreement that will set ceilings on the number of troops deployed by both sides.
19901116000000000	RAISING 17,000 NEW QUESTIONS. In two days the 22 nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact are scheduled to sign an agreement for the largest conventional arms cuts in history. The numbers involved are staggering. Tens of thousands of weapons -- tanks, artillery pieces, armored personnel carriers, fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters -- will disappear from Europe, an outward and visible sign that a new era of greater trust and security has dawned over a Continent so long riven by a costly and perilous ideological conflict. A disturbing element of uncertainty, however, threatens to cloud this new dawn. The Soviet Union, by moving early to withdraw a great deal of combat equipment from the territory of its erstwhile Warsaw Pact allies, has substantially reduced the number of its weapons that must be destroyed or militarily deactivated -- without, necessarily, significantly reducing its overall arsenal. Almost 17,000 tanks, for example, have already been shipped across the Urals to Soviet Asia and so are not subject to the provisions of the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty. The status of those tanks and other heavy weapons moved to Siberia seems certain to be raised as a point of contention when the CFE treaty goes to the Senate for ratification. Some U.S. officials suggest that the stored weapons are no danger to NATO. Much of the equipment is apparently being left out in the open where the elements will soon get to it. Still, an estimated 16,800 Soviet tanks, 15,000 other armored vehicles and 20,000 artillery pieces that had earlier been headed for destruction have been shifted and so escaped the scrap heap. Some may indeed be left to rust, but Washington has asked for an accounting on these weapons and is awaiting a Soviet response. The Senate almost surely will demand such an accounting and seek clear assurances about the weapons' future before it agrees to ratify the CFE treaty. A very real, very serious issue of Soviet good faith has been raised. It must be promptly addressed, for much more than the CFE treaty may depend on getting satisfactory answers. U.S. CONCERNED ABOUT SHIFT OF TANKS TO SIBERIA. Only days before the scheduled signing of a sweeping European arms control treaty, U.S. officials expressed concern Thursday about the shift of thousands of Soviet tanks from Eastern Europe to Siberian territory not covered by the new pact. The Soviet tanks and other armored vehicles moved east of the Ural Mountains cannot be excluded in calculating arms cutbacks required by the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty, a high U.S. official said. While Soviet negotiators have given assurances that some of the the weapons and equipment already have been destroyed and most of the rest will be scrapped later, U.S. officials said a team of American specialists has been sent to Moscow to get more precise information. "This is a footnote, not the focus," one Bush Administration official said, noting that the Soviet Union has been pulling back its forces from Europe for nearly two years with U.S. encouragement. "But we want to get a handle on it." Many of the tanks have been left in unprotected outdoor depots, exposed to the weather, according to Administration officials. U.S. satellite cameras also can detect stockpiles of Soviet arms that exceed the new ceilings. At any rate, U.S. officials added, the tanks issue will not interfere with the planned signing of the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty in Paris on Monday by President Bush, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and heads of 20 other North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact nations. The treaty, negotiated in a remarkably short 20-month period, is aimed at reducing Cold War tensions between East and West by bringing the former antagonists to military parity in a huge area stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals. Even before agreement was reached, the Soviet Union was making major troop reductions in Eastern Europe as it relaxed its political grip on Warsaw Pact members such as Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland. The treaty would make many of those arms reductions legally binding and give assurances to Moscow that the West would not build up its forces beyond the treaty levels. Under the terms of the treaty, each side would be able to keep 20,000 battle tanks, 30,000 other armored vehicles, 20,000 artillery pieces, 6,800 combat planes and 2,000 attack helicopters. U.S. officials said the agreement is a victory for the Administration, since cutbacks in tanks and other heavy weapons will be far greater for the East than for NATO. On Sunday, the day before the arms reduction agreement is to be signed, both sides will exchange information about the size of their non-nuclear forces in Europe. They will have 40 months to destroy weapons that exceed the ceilings set in the treaty.
19920111000000000	FT  11 JAN 92 / Kazakhs threaten to sell arms as CIS crisis grows. THE republic of Kazakhstan yesterday threatened to form its own armed forces and sell arms abroad, as the crisis deepened within the military structures of the Commonwealth of Independent States, successor to the Soviet Union, John Lloyd writes from Moscow. Mr Nursultan Nazarbayev, the Kazakh president, promised the republic would take its own measures in response to an oath which Russian president Boris Yeltsin has said must be sworn by all members of the formerly Soviet military. The oath pledges allegiance to 'the Russian Federation and its people', and appears to apply to soldiers of every nationality serving in any republic. 'All officers and men must remain loyal to the first oath that they took (of allegiance to the USSR),' said Mr Nazarbayev. The republic's security council yesterday decided to form a national guard of 2,000 men; and Mr Daulet Simbayev, the deputy prime minister, said the republic could soon start selling arms abroad. The move came as the commonwealth's foreign ministers met in Moscow, with control of the Black Sea Fleet high on the agenda of talks which Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, said would have to deal with 'acute problems'. The war of words between Russia and Ukraine over the fleet continued yesterday, as Admiral Igor Kasotonov, the fleet commander, said that dividing the ships would upset the strategic balance of forces in the area in favour of the US Sixth Fleet. He said the Ukrainian demands for control of the fleet were 'absurd and untenable', and accused the Ukrainian defence ministry of incompetence. Lt Col Sergei Starykh, chairman of the Independent Association of Officers of the Ukraine, said air force pilots based in the republic might soon start repatriating their aircraft to Russian airfields because of the 'psychological pressures' put on the officers to sign an oath of loyalty to Ukraine. He said half the personnel in the seven air force units in the republic had refused to take the oath. In comments to a visiting US delegation, Mr Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian president, has said the republic intends to remove all tactical nuclear weapons from the territory by July this year and destroy all strategic weapons by 1994. All 176 launch silos would be destroyed within three years, instead of 130 within seven years as stipulated in the strategic arms reduction treaty treaty signed between the US and the Soviet Union, he said. Mr Kravchuk said he would soon have a 'special device' in his office to block the launching of any missiles anywhere in the former Soviet Union without the consent of all of the presidents of the states with strategic missiles - Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus. David Gardner adds from Brussels: In Brussels, EC foreign ministers yesterday decided that new agreements were needed with the former Soviet republics, to bind them into western Europe's free market and democratic system. It was agreed that traditional trade and co-operation agreements were insufficient for states committed to democratisation and transition to the market economy. The Commission argued for intermediate treaties between these and the so-called Europe agreements signed last month with Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland, which refer to these countries joining the EC in future. The object would be 'the widest possible opening of markets' and 'special emphasis on support for institution building and the strengthening of civil society,' the Commission told ministers. Senior diplomats said that efforts to seek such agreements would concentrate initially on Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. REPUBLICS of the former Soviet Union agreed in talks at Nato headquarters in Brussels yesterday to enforce reductions in heavy army weapons and aircraft as soon as possible and without renegotiating the 1990 Conventional Arms Forces in Europe treaty, David White writes. The agreement to assume Soviet treaty obligations was reached at talks attended by officials from 10 former Soviet republics, including the three Baltic states, as well as other members of the defunct Warsaw Pact and Nato allies. The Baltic states are considered as being outside the treaty, but it is thought they may later join it. Mr Dick Cheney, the US defence secretary, warned yesterday that the Black Sea row might lead to a dispute about control of the nuclear stockpile. The US was watching the situation 'very carefully', he said before leaving the UK for Germany. Under yesterday's agreement, Russia, Ukraine and the other newly independent states are to share out the Soviet Union's arms cuts 'in a manner acceptable to all parties' to the CFE treaty. They agreed they should all ratify the treaty, which the Soviet Union failed to do before its demise. Some updating of the treaty would be needed after it came into effect.
19920226000000000	FT  26 FEB 92 / CIS states give pledge on arms cuts. THE SUCCESSOR states to the Soviet Union have promised to agree by the end of May on a share-out of the weapons cuts to which Moscow committed itself under the 1990 Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty, a Nato official said yesterday. At a meeting with Nato and east European countries in Brussels last Friday, members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) promised to re-allocate the weapons reductions in time for a special conference at the end of May, in the hope that the CFE treaty could come into force by this summer's Helsinki conference. The five other members of the defunct Warsaw Pact have ratified the CFE pact, as have 11 Nato countries; the remaining five Nato members expected to do so very soon. But it is a tall order for the CIS states to settle their raging quarrels about redistributing Soviet military resources within the next three months. The CFE treaty, setting geographic ceilings on tanks, artillery, combat aircraft and helicopters, covers the territory of eight CIS members. However, three of these - Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan - are outside the CIS joint military command. The treaty was negotiated on the basis of the old Soviet military districts, whose boundaries do not coincide with the new CIS borders. It thus allows Ukraine far more weapons than Russia (west of the Urals), but also splits it in two, along the dividing line between the old Soviet military districts of Kiev and Odessa. Nato officials said yesterday they hoped to get away with only minor technical adjustments to the treaty, which they said was 'the cornerstone' of any further arms control, such as the troop reductions being discussed in Vienna.
19920606000000000	FT  06 JUN 92 / European arms cuts pact signed. NATO and its former Warsaw Pact adversaries yesterday signed an agreement on sweeping arms cuts in Europe, which had been blocked by the collapse of the Soviet Union and disagreements among its successor states over how to share out reductions in tanks, aircraft and other military equipment. The protocol to the conventional forces in Europe treaty (CFE), signed in Paris at the end of 1990 when the Soviet Union was still a unified state, was signed by 29 members of the North Atlantic Co-operation Council, created in December as a forum for co-operation between Nato and the former Warsaw Pact members. The problems between Russia and the other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) were finally sorted out at a summit in Tashkent last month. The aim is that the CFE treaty will now be ratified by all its signatories in time for a summit of the 52-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, due to be held in Helsinki at the beginning of next month. However, one of the CIS states, Belarus, may not be able to ratify the treaty in time because it is still drawing up a constitution and because of domestic political opposition, according to officials here. Most Nato and east European countries have already ratified the treaty, but Turkey has yet to do so. Once the treaty has been ratified by all its signatories, the arms cuts will have to be implemented over a four-year period. Under the CFE treaty, the former Soviet republics have undertaken to destroy much more equipment than western countries, whose conventional forces in Europe have always been numerically smaller. But the treaty does not cover cuts in military manpower. That issue will be the subject of a new agreement, negotiations for which have barely got under way. Nuclear weapons and naval forces are also excluded from CFE. Among the CIS states, by far the biggest cuts will be made by Russia, followed by the Ukraine and Belarus.
19920804000000000	FT  04 AUG 92 / Germany beocmes first European country to destroy cold war arsenal. Germany yesterday became the first European country to start destroying its cold war arsenal when officials lit a cutting torch to destroy a Soviet-made armoured car and a cannon, Reuter reports from Rochensussra. Defence Minister Volker Ruhe (centre) and Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel (right) had to jump back from a massive BTR-40 P2 armoured personnel carrier (APC) as sparks showered over them. 'There is no place any more in a Europe of democratic states and pluralistic societies for over-armament and the bulging arsenals of the cold war,' Mr Ruhe said at the ceremony in the village near Erfurt in Thuringen state. Mr Kinkel said: 'This day is a symbol for the victory of reason and morality over confrontation and the arms race.' The APC and the 125mm Howitzer cut apart in Rochensussra, once behind the Iron Curtain, were the first of about 40,000 tanks, artillery and helicopters that European states will destroy by late 1995.
19921009000000000	FT  09 OCT 92 / Ukraine emerges as a power to be reckoned with. UKRAINE'S emergence as one of Europe's main military heavyweights is shown starkly in the International Institute for Strategic Studies' (IISS) latest Military Balance. The break-up of the Soviet Union has left Ukraine with an air force of about 1,100 combat aircraft, more than any Nato country in Europe and more than twice as big as any of Moscow's former Warsaw pact allies. Although Ukraine's armed forces, at 230,000, are smaller than those of Poland, its holdings of tanks and armoured vehicles are bigger than those of any European nation after Russia and Germany. This is set to remain so after reductions in heavy land weaponry and aircraft are completed under the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty. Ukraine and Russia have an unresolved dispute over strategic nuclear weapons. This has now been given a new twist by Russia's surprise decision to claim jurisdiction over all the former Soviet Union's nuclear weapons. Ukraine has reacted angrily to the announcement by Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, head of the Commonwealth of Independent States joint forces, that he was ready to turn over all the weapons to Russia immediately. The IISS has had to reorganise radically the material contained in its annual publication - which for more than 30 years set out a balance of forces between east and west - to take account of the abolition of the Warsaw Pact and the disintegration of both the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. In the Middle East, the institute has revised upwards its estimate of the artillery strengths of both Iran (increased from 1,000 to more than 1,300 heavy guns) and Iraq (1,200 instead of 1,000). Recorded additions to Iran's air force include 10 modern Russian MiG-29 fighters (part of what is reported to be a much larger purchase), a similar number of Su-24 attack aircraft and 12 Chinese F-7 fighters (an updated version of the Soviet MiG-21). Iraq's army strength is estimated at 29 divisions, half the number in existence before the 1991 Gulf conflict. These include seven Republican Guard armoured and mechanised divisons, compared with four reported a year ago. Naval capability is expected to be minimal for several years, although more Iraqi naval vessels survived the war than was originally thought, the IISS says. The Military Balance 1992-1993; IISS/Brassey's; Pounds 35/Dollars 55.
19921222000000000	FT  22 DEC 92 / The empire splits up: The fragmentation of Warsaw Pact countries is creating an unstable division of military might. Across central and eastern Europe, armed forces are being remodelled or created anew. In place of a monolithic system, a new military map is in the making, fragmented, unstructured and disparate. Since the winding-up last year of the Warsaw Pact and then the Soviet Union itself, a pattern of new regional powers and spheres of influence has begun to emerge. In its closing months, after the loss of East Germany in 1989, the Warsaw Pact had six members. In the new year, when the Czech and Slovak republics split, the six will have become 21 countries, all either possessing their own armies, or forming them, or planning to form them, with differing degrees of civilian control and varying levels of clarity about doctrines or aims. Old grievances and suspicions are returning in a region where borders affecting large swathes of territory and ethnic groups have changed within living memory. Nationalism is resurgent. Tensions and clashes of interest are inevitable. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) counts some 30 current territorial disputes in the Caucasus region alone, arising from frontier changes in the 1920s, 1930s and 1950s. On the fringes of the former Soviet Union, war has already struck Georgia, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan. The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia have revealed the inability of present European security structures and mechanisms to tackle crises of this sort. Military authorities in central and eastern Europe all now profess democratic principles, but they are largely survivors from the old system. For 36 years their armies acted as an extension of the Soviet command, with standardised military doctrines and equipment. Today's reform-oriented general staff officers come from a background of allegiance to the party and to the dominant ally. Reform of army structures is going on while remnants of a Soviet troop presence remain in Germany and Poland as well as various former Soviet republics, and while part of Moscow's long-range nuclear arsenal lies stranded in three republics outside Russia. Military spending among Moscow's former allies has been dropping for several years, although according to SIPRI the process slowed down in 1991. Throughout the region cuts have begun under the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty, which demands the destruction of large numbers of heavy weapons, aircraft and helicopters. But the treaty, agreed between the Warsaw Pact and the Nato nations two years ago, was designed to balance two blocs, not to secure stability within either group of countries. There are enormous disparities. Belarus, finding itself unexpectedly independent, currently has twice as many tanks as Britain, more big guns than France, more combat aircraft than Germany. In Ukraine, there are reckoned to be about 700,000 troops, including forces withdrawn by Moscow from Germany, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Under agreed manpower ceilings, these are due to be reduced to 450,000 in 1995. The official aim is a strength of 250,000 - roughly equivalent to the UK's - at the end of the decade. Most have signed oaths of allegiance to Ukraine. Experts say some 10,000 officers have refused and are due to leave. But there may be up to 200,000 Ukrainian officers currently serving in other republics and eligible to return. Ukraine now has more tanks, armoured vehicles and combat aircraft than any other country in Europe after Russia. Even under the CFE cuts its entitlements for tanks and armoured vehicles are Europe's third largest, and for artillery and aircraft the second largest, dwarfing those of its neighbours to the west. With seven national borders and a Black Sea coast, Ukraine holds a pivotal position in the region. The greatest source of international concern is its ambiguity over the nuclear weapons on its soil: 176 SS-19 and SS-24 intercontinental ballistic missiles and two bases with nuclear-armed Bear and Blackjack bombers. The country's leaders have promised to become non-nuclear by the end of 1994. But Ukraine has yet to ratify the Start treaty with the US on reducing strategic arsenals, as Russia and Kazakhstan have. Unlike Belarus it has refused to accept full Russian control over the weapons. In the spring, it stalled over the transfer of short-range nuclear arms for destruction in Russia. Its aim now appears to be to win the financial assistance it failed to obtain then. The US has already offered it Dollars 175m to help dismantle the strategic arsenal and store the materials, on condition that Kiev joins the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. 'It is largely a bargaining chip, but we can't be sure,' says Dr Mark Smith, who heads research on the former Soviet Union at the Royal United Services Institute in London. Ukraine does not have operational control over the weapons, nor the command system it would require. But experts believe it could overcome these hurdles. Under the Soviet system, the most advanced stages of nuclear weapon production were kept in Russia, but Ukraine could undoubtedly develop an indigenous capability. Nato officials are worried that President Leonid Kravchuk may be attracted to the idea of a place in the family of nuclear-weapon states. Some parliamentarians have spoken of the desirability of a small nuclear deterrent. 'Why should they give it away, if they distrust the Russians?' asks Mr Henry Plater-Zyberk, a military expert at the University of Surrey. Uncertainty also surrounds the future of the former Soviet Black Sea fleet. Agreement was reached in August on a temporary joint Russian-Ukrainian command, putting off the division of the fleet for three years. But there have been hints that Ukraine may want to extend its naval presence beyond its coastal waters and possibly into the Mediterranean. The European countries that have emerged from Moscow's domination have all, except for Belarus, clearly turned their backs to Russia. Since the Warsaw Pact's demise in April, 1991, a queue of potential applicants has built up at Nato's door. However, officials at the organisation's headquarters in Brussels complain that the central and eastern European countries have 'exaggerated expectations of what Nato can do'. The North Atlantic Co-operation Council, set up by Nato as a forum for these countries, also embraces the former Soviet Union's central Asian republics, with which they have few interests in common and which still have ties with Russia. Nato, created for stability in Europe, has yet to work out what its function is in that part of the continent which used to be in Moscow's dominion. Mr Dick Cheney, the outgoing US defence secretary, recently issued a personal warning to Nato colleagues: 'An organisation devoted to security that does not address these concerns is not going to survive long-term.' Nato should ultimately agree to admit 'at least some of these nations', he said. But Nato allies are reluctant to provide security guarantees over territory reaching to the borders of the former Soviet Union. They are also anxious not to sideline Russia. In the Baltics, Nato has been trying to dampen fears about Russian aggression and about the concentration of Russian forces in the Kaliningrad enclave between Lithuania and Poland. This area contains as many as 400,000 troops, officials say, including units being withdrawn from Germany and the independent Baltic republics. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia are creating new armies - still tiny with hardly any equipment. They are the only three countries building up their military from scratch. Elsewhere the greatest advances in ideas for reform and restructuring have been made in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, the members of the Visegrad group formed last year. All want to redeploy forces concentrated near their western borders. But in the case of air forces this means building new airfields. The problem is at its most acute in the division now being undertaken between Czech and Slovak forces. Military strength, including air defence, has been concentrated in western Bohemia, although the defence industry is mostly in Slovakia. Equipment in these countries lagged behind that of Soviet forces. But modernising is difficult, with Nato not yet ready to supply arms and traditional suppliers demanding payment in hard currency. Hungary, which has had fighters on alert since a cluster bomb fell on a border village in October last year in a spillover from the fighting in former Yugoslavia, has obtained aircraft identification equipment from the US, the first such supplies to a former Warsaw Pact country. It is also getting spares from the former East German army and recently agreed to take Dollars 800m worth of equipment from Russia as part of debt repayments. Most of the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States - the fragile grouping of former Soviet republics other than the Baltics and Georgia - have founded their own national forces; Tajikistan plans to; Turkmenistan is the only one planning to share command with Russia. But if these countries want professional, western-style forces, how are they going to afford them? Their ministries frequently cannot even afford the fares to take part in seminars with Nato members. Implementing the CFE cuts is an awesome problem for all central and eastern European countries. Cutting up tanks is expensive and environmentally hazardous. It is unclear how Russia and Ukraine, in particular, will face up to the force reductions required, with large-scale military unemployment adding to the effects of economic upheaval. The deterioration of morale and discipline in the Russian military is already notorious. Officers are disoriented, some bitterly resentful of the way arms control has been handled. Most of the Russian forces are now regarded by Nato as being in poor condition. Cuts promised for the end of the decade include a 45 per cent reduction in current troop numbers. But even then, Russia will still have an army of 1.5m, backed by 3,000 long-range nuclear weapons, the accoutrements of a superpower. When a Nato military official declares that 'none of us is afraid of the Russians any more', he is speaking for stable, secure western Europe and not for the countries that have emerged from the Warsaw Pact.
19931007000000000	FT  07 OCT 93 / Crisis in Russia: Moscow hints it may breach troop cuts treaty. RUSSIA has issued a veiled threat that it will breach the terms of the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) disarmament treaty unless it is allowed to raise the ceilings on its forces in the Caucasus region. President Boris Yeltsin wrote to leaders of several Nato states last month seeking to change the accord, but this is being firmly resisted. The initiative is seen as part of Mr Yeltsin's recent campaign to win the favour of the senior Russian military establishment. The CFE treaty, cutting holdings of tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, helicopters and aircraft in Europe, was signed in 1990 when the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union were both intact. Russia and other former Soviet republics agreed on how to share out the cuts at a summit in Tashkent in May last year. But Russia now sees this arrangement as having left it too weakly armed on its southern flank. Diplomats at Nato said the Russians had not gone so far as to threaten withdrawal, but had warned that they might resort to measures outside the treaty. This was seen as implying that they might move equipment beyond the limits set in the treaty. Turkey, the Nato member which would be most affected, has asked allies to oppose the moving of additional Russian forces. Russia raised the issue earlier at the Joint Consultative Group which meets in Vienna to oversee implementation of the CFE treaty. A breach of the treaty would be taken 'very seriously' by allies, diplomats said. Nato would try instead to persuade Russia to make use of the treaty's flexibility over forces in the 'flank zone', which includes Russia's North Caucasus military district. The treaty, they said, gave it leeway to move equipment to the Caucasus from the Leningrad district, also part of the flank zone. They added that Russia did not, in any case, have to meet its ceilings until November 1995, the deadline for full implementation of the treaty. 'They have two years to do whatever they want in the Caucasus,' one commented. Nato opposes an amendment to the treaty because it fears that would prompt demands for changes from other countries, undermining the whole accord. Poland has told Colonel Vladimir Lomakin, the Russian military attache in Warsaw, to leave because of 'activities incompatible with his status as a diplomat', the Polish Press Agency said yesterday. Defence Ministry officials in Warsaw refused to confirm that Col Lomakin's opposite number in Moscow, General Roman Harmoza, had also been expelled, saying he had been recalled to Warsaw for 'consultations'.
19940112000000000	FT  12 JAN 94 / Clinton in Europe: Eastern Europe caught up in new arms race  -Defence fears and potential profits in the weapons trade have forced states to change track. Central European leaders meet President Bill Clinton today aware that in future they will have to pay more attention to their own defence. This conviction had been growing long before the rise of Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky underlined the potential risk from Russian nationalism. The initial revulsion against the arms trade from the idealistic former dissidents who formed the first post-communist governments did not last long. It gave way to a more sombre reassessment of future military requirements and a more aggressive approach to selling arms on world markets. What remains is a deep reluctance to jeopardise economic reforms by diverting funds from hard-pressed budgets to the military. Strapped for cash, several of the former Warsaw pact states have been quietly turning to Russia to update their arsenals, taking advantage of Moscow's willingness to supply arms in return for writing off rouble credits left over from the old days of state trading. The Hungarian army, for example, was always kept small and poorly equipped by Moscow after it sided with 'counter-revolutionaries' during the 1956 Budapest uprising. But the war in neighbouring Yugoslavia and a resurgence of anti-Hungarian sentiment in Slovakia and Romania, two other neighbours with large ethnic Hungarian minorities, caused Budapest to take a fresh look at its armed forces two years ago. Russian President Boris Yeltsin, on a visit to Hungary, offered to supply modern Mig-29 fighters, spare parts and equipment worth Dollars 800m (Pounds 540.5m) in partial repayment of Russia's Dollars 2bn accumulated trade debt with Hungary. The Hungarian government agreed. It wanted to deter repeated breaches of Hungarian airspace by Yugoslav air force jets making intimidatory flights over Croatian villages across the Danube. Further negotiations are taking place between Budapest and Moscow over the possible acquisition of sophisticated surface-to-air missiles. Shortly after the original Russian aircraft deal, the German government donated spare parts and equipment from the vast stockpile of military equipment inherited from the former east German army. To allay the fears of sensitive neighbours, Budapest announced it was destroying 510 older tanks to fulfil its obligations under the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) agreements which led to the scrapping of thousands of tanks and other arms throughout the region. But this did not mollify Mr Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak leader, who arranged a matching MiGs for credit write-off deal with Moscow last autumn. Hungary's decision to upgrade its military equipment drew attention to the non-Russian factors conspiring to make governments and arms producers reassess their military thinking throughout the former Soviet bloc. The clearest turnabout is apparent in both sides of former Czechoslovakia. The moral revulsion of the leaders of the 1989 'velvet revolution' against communist Czechoslovakia's role as an arms manufacturer and exporter led to a virtual embargo on arms exports. But this had a devastating effect on arms factories and related heavy industries located mainly in Slovakia and became a big element in the divorce between the two states last year. Czech and Slovak arms exports dropped from a peak of CzKr27bn (Dollars 1bn) in 1987 to only CzKr6bn in 1992 while arms companies from the west and other former Warsaw pact states scooped up potential contracts. Once Slovakia gained its independence, however, Mr Meciar made clear that former federal restrictions on arms sales were no longer valid and the Czech Republic has also been busy re-building a smaller but more competitive arms industry, with industrial groups like Skoda Pilsen attracting western partners to produce updated arms. Poland, like the other former Soviet satellites, has retired hundreds of Soviet-trained senior officers. It now faces a power struggle over political control of the armed forces between President Lech Walesa and the new left-of-centre government. It has also been discussing co-operation with foreign companies, including Israel with its close military hardware links with the US and South Africa. All the former Warsaw pact countries of central Europe are operating new defence strategies which reduce the overall level of forces and shift units away from the western deployment demanded in the old days. But progress is slow, largely because of the cost. It is not that Poland sees an immediate military threat from the east, although Warsaw is anxious to see the complete Russian military withdrawal from Estonia and Latvia and remains nervous about the concentration of former Soviet forces in Kaliningrad. This Russian port-city enclave on the Baltic has an estimated 300,000 troops and their equipment withdrawn from east Germany and awaiting repatriation. Kaliningrad has become one of the great arms bazaars in a region awash with military equipment and demoralised soldiers. The most worrisome scenario remains the prospect of a destabilising wave of economic refugees. This is not a problem which can be solved by military means, but higher unemployment in the former Soviet states is inevitable if the military-industrial complex is slimmed down. Ironically the prospect of mass unemployment in the military industries may recede somewhat as the military-industrial lobbies regain ground in post-election Russia, but Poles fear this will tend to reinforce the political influence of hardliners who remain unreconciled to the loss of the Baltic states and central Europe.
19940607000000000	FT  07 JUN 94 / Nato arms pour into Greece and Turkey. The arsenals of Turkey and Greece, nominal Nato allies whose chronically tense relations have come under fresh strain in recent weeks, are being upgraded at an unprecedented pace, according to an independent study. Last year alone, Turkey received a total of 1,017 main battle tanks - almost as much as the entire holdings of the British army - from the US and Germany, while Greece took delivery of 725, the study shows. Figures on the two countries' arms imports were extrapolated by researchers in Britain, the US and Germany from the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms, which has been tracking the weapons trade since the beginning of 1992. They indicate that total deliveries to Greece and Turkey in 1992-93 from Germany and the US included 2,822 tanks, 1,084 armoured combat vehicles, 303 large calibre artillery systems, 28 attack helicopters and 14 warships. The statistics were compiled by the British American Security Information Council and the Berlin Information Centre for Transatlantic Security. Both are independent lobby groups that promote disarmament. A spokesman for the Stockholm Institute for Peace Research, another arms trade watchdog, said its researches also pointed to a heavy flow of armaments to Greece and Turkey. Most of the deliveries were made free of charge under a programme known as Cascade, under which the smaller Nato countries can receive weapons from allies who are obliged to slash their arsenals under arms control agreement. Even though much of the equipment being transferred is secondhand, it represents a huge improvement over existing Greek and Turkish stocks. Most of the tanks involved have been US-built M-60s or German Leopards, both of which carry much more sophisticated electronic equipment than the M-48 which has been a mainstay of both armies until recently. During the cold war period, the leading Nato members worked energetically behind the scenes to put some limit on the intensity of Greek-Turkish rivalry, but this effort has now slackened. An initiative to promote confidence-building measures among the countries of southeastern Europe - launched in Vienna under the aegis of the Helsinki process - was quietly abandoned after one meeting in March, diplomats say. Greece and Turkey now find themselves sympathising with opposite sides in former Yugoslavia, with Turkey one of the strongest supporters of Bosnia's Moslem leadership and Greece a traditional friend of the Serbs. Relations between Athens and Ankara have deteriorated in recent days following allegations in the Turkish media that supporters of the Kurdish insurgency which has claimed around 12,000 lives in eastern Turkey were trained in Greece. Without directly blaming the Greek government, the Turkish authorities have pointedly drawn the attention of several western governments to these reports. The Greek government has angrily rejected the allegations, and the Athens media have quoted a Kurdish prisoner in Turkey as saying, in a message smuggled out of jail, that his account of training in Greece was extracted under duress.
