10000000000000000	Declining Birth Rates Where are birth rates declining  What are the reasons for declining birth rates  What are the effects of a declining birth rate.
19890430000000000	FALLING EUROPEAN BIRTH RATE IS NEW PROBLEM FOR NATO. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is facing a manpower shortage because of falling birth rates in its 16 member nations. One remedy, officials here at NATO headquarters say, is the talks with the Soviet-led East Bloc in Vienna, which could bring an accord on reducing troops and conventional arms in Europe. The U.S. Institute for Defense Analysis has forecast that by the year 2000, NATO members will see an average 12.4% drop in draft-age males while there will be a 15.2% increase among the seven Warsaw Pact nations. One reason is what the West Germans call the pillenknick (pill dip), a falling birth rate due to greater use of the birth control pill in recent decades. According to statistics supplied by the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers, Europe, the problem is most acute in West Germany, whose supply of draft-age males will decline 45% from 1985 to 2000. In that same period, the statistics indicated, the Netherlands will see a drop in males in the 18-to-24 age group of 30%, followed by Belgium, 27%; Britain and Luxembourg, 25% each; Italy, 23%; Denmark, 17%; France, 13%, and Portugal, 9%. Greece's supply of draftable males will remain even over the next decade. Only Turkey expects an increase. The U.S. armed forces also face a declining manpower base. In 1979, 2.2 million Americans were old enough to sign up for military service. This fell to 1.9 million last year and will dip to 1.6 million by 1992. To maintain adequate defenses, NATO is considering improving the combat role of reserve forces, possibly by amending the way they are deployed in times of crisis. "The need to tap this potential has taken on a new urgency," said Gen. John Akehurst, the deputy supreme allied commander in Europe. In wartime, under present plans NATO forces would include 5 million people, half of them reserves or volunteer citizen-soldiers whose key wartime task would be to provide logistical support for combat troops. The United States has begun strengthening its military reserves. Since 1980, their numbers have increased from 1.4 million to 1.7 million. West Germany also has begun doubling the number of reservists for military excercises, but with mixed results: in 1985, a third of its reservists never showed up for their service. Reservists do not enjoy equal prestige in all allied nations, and there are a variety of rules regarding their function. "The education and training periods are different, the time a country is really going to use its reservists, i.e. keep them trained and keep them on the list for active duty, is different," one NATO official said. "As a result, there is a large pool of reserves . . . not trained to the extent required." The increased use of reserves would offset the effect of falling birth rates, but the "graying" of NATO populations also will reduce the ranks of reserves. This is already evident in West Germany, which has 1.6 million reservists but will have only 1 million by the mid-1990s. Finding enough manpower poses special problems for the volunteer armed forces of Britain, the United States and Canada, which compete with private industry for a shrinking pool of personnel.
19910514000000000	FT  14 MAY 91 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (6): Fuzzy logic and robots spell technological advantage - Japan, modifying production philosophies as emphasis shifts back to the human workforce. IT seemed laughable at the time: a couple years ago a Japanese manufacturer replaced some factory line workers with automation machinery, then set up full-sized cardboard human dummies to keep the remaining workers from getting lonely. The completely workerless factory is a decade away, but there are a few showcase examples including Fanuc, the machine tool manufacturer's factory near Mount Fuji, where robots make robots. But until no-human factories are realised on a broad scale, factory automation system makers will focus their research on bridging the awkward interaction between humans and the ever increasing number of machines working by their side. In past years manufacturers put the emphasis on installing labour-saving machines to raise production. They focused on maximising the use of people, money, time and materials, and humans had to find a way to fit in with the complex machinery beginning to surround them. 'Until now humans have had to adapt to use machines, so the man-machine interface was not well matched,' says Mr Hiroshi Matsuyama, a manager at Omron the programmable controller maker in Tokyo. 'Japanese industry is now modifying its philosophy. The centre of production has shifted to human workers, and computers should be matched with humans,' he says. That means designing new software that allows production machinery to be more easily used and changed quickly for different jobs. For example, welding or insertion and using artificial intelligence techniques such as fuzzy logic to help robots and computers make better decisions, such as finding an operational failure, through inferences, as humans do. The escalating skilled labour shortage, brought about by a declining birth rate and a more affluent and highly educated society, makes robots an important component of factory automation, a do-or-die decision for some companies. Strong competition in industries such as shipping has resulted in waves of investment in labour-saving technology such as steel and aluminium cutting tools, processing machines and welding robots. The rise in the labour force is expected to be 0.8 per cent a year until 1993, then it is likely to fall off by half to 0.4 per cent until 2000, according to Japanese government statistics. During that time Japan expects to keep about a 4 per cent annual economic growth rate. 'To achieve this it is necessary to introduce automation technology,' says Mr Kanji Yonemoto, vice-chairman of the Japan Industrial Robot Association (Jira) in Tokyo. An even more remarkable shift in Japan's economy is the switch from a manufacturing to a service economy. Jobs in services pay better. Mr Yonemoto says there will be 1.5m fewer blue-collar workers in manufacturing by 2000 than in 1989, when there was a shortage of 715,800 people. Today's young people are a different breed of worker from those who laboured long hours for little pay to build Japan's industrial miracle. They want to avoid so-called '3K' work: 'kiken' (dangerous), 'kitanai' (dirty) and 'kitsui' (hard). 'Older men were very patient and had the Bushido (warrior) morale, but it is hard to find these people today,' says Mr Matsuyama. Replacing them with machinery takes time and money. Omron, which produces programmable controllers and other electronics products, sees the improvements that can be made in factory automation as almost limitless and including diagnosing system failures and other management tasks. The improvements span a broad factory automation market valued at almost Y2,000bn and covering every aspect of making a product from design through production and inspection. The important components of automating a factory are numerical controllers, the largest chunk of the market, as well as computer-aided design and manufacturing software and equipment, industrial robots, programmable controllers, automated warehouses, computers and automatic guided vehicles that transport products throughout a plant site. Japan leads the world in both producing and using these production components. It has replaced Germany as the biggest exporter of machine tools, an important indicator of industrial development and economic power. Japan has an estimated 23 per cent of the world market compared to the 16 per cent held by Germany. Five Japanese companies are making machine tools in Europe. Mazak Yamazaki, for example, has a Dollars 50m factory in Worcester, in the UK which produces some 100 computer-controlled machines a month, according to industry estimates. Japan's worldwide share of the fast-growing robot market is even more impressive: it has 57.5 per cent of the robot installations worldwide, with western Europe having 14.5 per cent and the US 9.5 per cent. Japan's main advantages are that workers in automotive, electronics and other factories are accustomed to and readily accept automation technology, product demand is still strong in the home market, and Japanese manufacturers make most of the machines they use for automation, so there is little competition from imports. The electronics industry is the biggest user of automation technology. At its Ome design and manufacturing works west of Tokyo, Toshiba uses its own laptop computers for design, development and assembly of new Toshiba laptops. The laptops are used to compute how easily a new computer model can be assembled by a line of 12 workers, who can slap together one notebook-size Dynabook computer in a few minutes. That's important, because the company is making about 1m laptops a year at Ome, and the life span of each new product is getting increasingly shorter amid hot competition. 'Often it's the case with some products that the effective life span is already over by the time it goes to the market place,' says Mr Masao Suga, who heads the personal computer research and development department at Ome. However, the shortening product life spans, which run from six months for a Japanese word processor to about three years for laptops, made it increasingly difficult for Toshiba to continue using robots. Toshiba replicates about 70 per cent of design work from current models in new ones. While it took Toshiba three years to develop the T3100 and J3100 laptops from scratch, it took only nine months to design the smaller-size Dynabook. Though its factory is about 70-80 per cent automated, visitors to the company often comment about the number of people still present on the manufacturing lines, but Mr Suga says that with the fast-paced product life cycles, humans are needed. 'There are problems with automated systems. They can't catch up with new technology, so humans are acting as universal super robots,' he adds. Fuzzy logic may help close the gap. Mr Yonemoto of Jira says fuzzy logic, software that can help make a decision from unclear information, will help increase the versatility of robots in the future by affording better control of their movements. Omron, a leader in using fuzzy technology, has developed a test robot that can grasp soft or fragile items, such as tofu (bean curd). In a New Year's address to employees, Mr Yoshio Tateisi, company president, identified fuzzy logic as an important research area for the 1990s. By 1994, more than 20 per cent of Omron's product line will include some type of fuzzy logic. According to Mr Matsuyama, fuzzy logic has many benefits. As part of a computer-integrated manufacturing (Cim) system it can be used in production and in managing the company. 'Another merit of fuzzy technology is to replace a person where computers are hard to use, for example, controlling a nuclear power generation plant's circulation control system to clean water and to make decisions. Perhaps the Chernobyl or Mihama plant accidents could have been avoided with these systems,' he says. Fuzzy logic, along with more flexible robots and other components, spell another technological advantage for Japan in the future: being able to change small-scale production quickly, so that multiple products can be produced on the same factory line in one day. Mr Matsuyama predicts Japanese manufacturers will become very good at this small-scale production, which is a difficult technology demanding ultimate flexibility. Computerisation would be all the more necessary in production in the sense that market information should be more effectively connected with the production process or with the factory itself. But large-scale flexible production without man will take 8-10 years says Matsushita Electric in Osaka. The company believes fuzzy logic, along with neurocomputing technology which more closely mimics the human brain, will be the main technologies once they are refined.
19920224000000000	FT  24 FEB 92 / Management: Looking west for inspiration - Japanese companies are for the first time seeing a rise in worker-power.  Steven Butler investigates how executives are coping. Japanese management is facing a serious challenge. An acute shortage of labour is edging the balance of power toward employees. Working hours are going down, job hopping is on the rise, and big companies are having to hire mid-career employees. These may be common trends in the west. But this is Japan, where lifetime employment at large companies has traditionally given Japanese executives unusual flexibility to manage their businesses. It has been a critical ingredient in the world-beating success of Japanese corporations. Yet this critical ingredient is coming under pressure. 'Eventually the system of lifetime employment will be destroyed,' predicts Akira Ono, an economist at Hitotsubashi University. Lifetime employment was a two-way contract, at least in theory. Companies guaranteed security of employment, while employees gave back loyalty and commitment, even to the point of accepting wage cuts during hard times and giving up holiday entitlements. Can Japanese companies continue to excel without it? This is more than a speculative question. Toyota Motor, Japan's biggest car maker, slashed production by 150,000 vehicles this fiscal year because it kept a promise to employees to cut 100 hours from the annual work load of 2,300 hours. It was unable to hire enough workers to make up the difference. Conveniently, demand for cars has also slumped. Toyota had no realistic choice but to cut working hours. Otherwise it would have had even more trouble retaining and hiring workers. Toyota - and other big manufacturers - are being forced to think about management in a way that never appeared necessary in the past, when they managed the workforce pretty much as they liked. Daiken Trade and Industry, a fibreboard maker, has just announced a 'New Personnel System' that includes fast-track promotion for capable employees. Kazuhiro Izumi, personnel manager, says the company needed to overhaul the promotion system or risk losing talented employees. 'People want to be told what their potential is and they want to know where their skills fit into the company's plans,' Izumi says. Yet the system upsets another of the 'rules' of Japanese management: that harmony should be maintained by basing all promotions on seniority. Daiken managers are now fielding complaints from long-serving workers who are left behind by fast-trackers. Rising affluence combined with greater choice afforded to job seekers has also changed attitudes, making motivation of the workforce a new problem. Toshihiro Takahashi, general manager of human resources at Toyota, says: 'The young generation does not see the value of manufacturing, does not see what it means to the country as a whole'. Yoshio Higuchi, an economist at Keio University, is concerned about the impact of the labour shortage on in-company training programmes, which are effectively the only places for Japanese workers to get practical training. 'If the job separation rate gets higher, then on-the-job-training doesn't work.' He fears companies will not get a sufficient return on investment in training if employees are hired away after finishing an in-house programme. Masamichi Shimizu, general affairs manager of the Japan Management Association, says that Japanese management style is rigid in dealing with individual workers' needs, and that changes in the work environment prompted by the labour shortage will highlight that rigidity. 'There are many admirable managers in Japan, but if the working environment continues in the present direction, what westerners regard as Japanese management style may not be appropriate,' Shimizu says. Japan's birth rate is falling, with the average number of children born to a women at 1.53 in 1990, far below the 2.1 needed to maintain a stable population. School graduates will peak next year at 1.23m and decline relentlessly to 960,000 by the turn of the century. Roughly twice as many new jobs are on offer as there are applicants, a ratio that has declined only marginally as a result of Japan's economic slowdown. Big employers like Toyota and Nissan have for several years filled vacancies by hiring mid-career employees, unheard of in the past. About 9 per cent of Japanese workers are changing jobs each year. This is an historic high, and compares with a ratio that has fluctuated between 8 per cent and 6.5 per cent in the past 15 years. The job hopping rate for technical and professional employees has risen steadily over the period. These trends can only become more severe in the years ahead. At least as far as the workers go, the trends are positive. Ono says: 'The labour shortage has given workers a good opportunity to put an end to unreasonable practices'. Men often work for extended periods, separated from families, because they have to accept orders to work anywhere in Japan. Workers are unable to say no when the boss asks them to do overtime, or give up the annual holiday. Shigehiro Murakami, of Nippon Gasket, a supplier of parts to Toyota Motor, says the lifetime employment system was a product of post-war poverty, not the choice of workers. 'The security that lifetime employment offered was a great attraction for people afraid of the poverty that went with unemployment. Now, instead of 10 people fighting for one job, young people have a choice of jobs.' he says. Employers are competing among themselves to offer better recreational and housing facilities and are investing heavily in plant and equipment aimed at making work easier and more pleasant. The new power of the employee has changed the chemistry of management relations within the corporation. Koji Matsumoto, a former official at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, argued in a recently translated book* that lifetime employment and the relative powerlessness of employees were key pillars of the Japanese corporate system. The mere knowledge by company employees that they have the option of changing jobs could erode this atmosphere of trust and prevent a company from pulling together to see the way through bad times. It is plainly too early to predict the downfall of the Japanese corporate system. Yet life at the top is already becoming more difficult for Japanese managers. Just as western managers have found inspiration in Japanese success, western models may soon have far more relevance in Japan. *Koji Matsumoto, The Rise of the Japanese Corporate System, translated by Thomas I Elliott, Kegan Paul International, 1991, Pounds 45.
19920225000000000	FT  25 FEB 92 / Letter: Health reforms answer to demographic change. Sir, In the battle of statistics on the National Health Service ('Temperature rises over NHS reforms', February 20), there is a vital one missing. Within the next nine years there will be a 50 per cent increase in those aged 85 and over, adding an extra 17 per cent to the health bill. Bearing in mind that the NHS already spends 40 per cent of its resources on the old age pensioners, that the medical technology costs are spiraling, and that there will be a reduction in the tax-paying workforce from a drop in the birth rate, it is only a matter of time before the Treasury gives up as the sole provider. It is therefore inevitable that whichever party wins the next election will have no choice but to examine new ways of financing health care. I have recently applied to become a fund-holder because I believe that the real strength of the reforms is that they have introduced devolution in medicine, by shifting powers from Whitehall to the districts - Home Rule for GPs] At a local level the huge problems from the expected demographic changes can be dealt with much more efficiently. I was therefore disappointed to read in your leader today that Labour will abolish the reforms, if elected, and return to a centralised bureaucracy. Kosta Manis, Erith Health Centre, Erith, Kent
19920302000000000	FT  02 MAR 92 / Management: Equality, not pornography - Women at Work. The auto industry has always been dominated by men, but at the Audi factory at Ingolstadt, near Munich, women are beginning to make their mark. For the last decade they have become an increasingly common sight on the production line. They are now also to be spotted in the ranks of management. The factory is loaded with women-welcome signals. Instead of the pornography that graces the walls of most factories, there are posters showing women and men working on cars wearing identical company overalls. Audi started hiring young women as apprentice tool makers and mechanics in 1978. As 80 per cent of the company's jobs are technical, the initiative was seen as essential if the company was to cease to be a male-stronghold. In some respects Germany has a more traditional view of male-female role differences than Britain, but in the last few years both the government and big companies have been trying to make it easier for women to combine careers and family. With the birth rate falling sharply, women are increasingly seen as important to companies like Audi. At the outset, Audi set itself the goal of increasing the proportion of female apprentices to 25 per cent. Over the last 14 years, 700 women aged 15 to 20 have taken places on these training schemes, many of whom have gone on to do advanced training. It has not been easy: the proportion of female apprentices has still not reached the target, although it has risen from around 5 per cent to nearly 20 per cent. One of the most difficult problems has been to persuade the women themselves to do technical jobs - Audi found the majority were much keener to go into sales-related jobs. In an attempt to change attitudes, the company is running advertisments in German newspapers pitched specifically at female recruits. It sends members of staff to give talks in schools to parents and students explaining the potential for young women coming into their factory, to overcome traditional views of the automotive industry as 'masculine'. Audi has learned a lot over the last decade about how best to integrate women into the company. Ten years ago the women were put in separate teams from the male apprentices but this did not work well. Now the teams are mixed, with at least two girls on a team. Women apprentices are encouraged to attend seminars where they can swap experiences. More recently, Audi has shifted its emphasis to trying to get women managers. This is part of a general move in German management, related to a shift away from Prussian-style hierarchies, to increase the ratio of women to men. 'Where does it say that men make the best managers? It is our policy to encourage more women to join the next generation of engineering and business managers . . . ' an Audi recruitment advertisement promises. Realising no equal opportunities programmes will work without endorsement from the top, the company has given a board director overall responsibility for women's development. Audi offers its staff 50 different types of part-time work. Mothers can take career breaks for up to seven years with a guaranteed job when they return. They can retrain with Audi during their maternity leave. As a company spokesman says: 'We have recognised the problem and are doing something about it in a positive way. What we don't want or need is quotas issued by the government.'
19920325000000000	FT  25 MAR 92 / Italy's exodus from large cities. Italy's population has scarcely grown over the past decade and is shifting from large city centres to smaller cities and large towns, according to preliminary results of the 10-yearly national census, published yesterday, writes Robert Graham in Rome. The population grew by just 0.3 per cent to 56,411,290, compared with a 3.9 per cent increase in the previous decade, confirming Italy's declining birthrate, one of the lowest in Europe.
19920501000000000	FT  01 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Ever less standing room S9SFOther. Here is an unhappy little scene, played out in Washington on Tuesday. It was the 43rd meeting of the joint development committee of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Several delegations, including the Dutch, asked whether something about population growth might perhaps be mentioned, just as an environmental matter. The counter-attack, led by the Saudis, was decisive. No reference to possibly the most pressing issue facing the world was allowed. A farce with the same script has been enacted during the preparations for the Earth Summit in Rio. The rich countries want to register the link between population growth and the destruction of the environment; the poor do not. This is absurd. According to yesterday's report from the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) the planet is about to be overrun by mankind. We are headed for 40 years of the fastest growth in human numbers in history. Never mind the UN's high or medium projections. On its low curve the world's population will increase by at least 2 1/2 bn within the lifetimes of present-day university students. That is the most optimistic forecast. It assumes that fertility rates will fall to replacement level everywhere tomorrow morning. It is more sensible to accept the medium expectation, that today's 5.4bn population will double, to 10bn, by 2050. Some idea of what this means was stated by Prince Charles last week. 'I don't, in all logic, see how any society can hope to improve its lot when population growth exceeds economic growth,' he said. For hundreds of millions of Indians, Africans and Latin Americans the consequence will be short lives of poverty and near-starvation. But the rest of us will not get off lightly. A recent joint report from Britain's Royal Society and America's National Academy of Sciences, quoted by the prince, described 'unrestrained resource consumption for energy production and other uses' as likely to lead to 'catastrophic outcomes for the global environment'. That is what to expect with 5.4bn people trying for higher living standards. Double the number, and you double the threat. Nor is the global effect - the one that hits us all - on the environment alone. The social and economic consequences can already be seen in increased migration: there were 2.8m refugees in 1976, 17.3m in 1990. Over the next 35 years, western Europe's indigenous labour force will fall by 14.5m; North Africa's will rise by 56.6m. North America's workforce will not increase, other than by immigration; Central America's will shoot up, by 50.5m. That's enough demographic nightmares. The question is, will we see solutions in the morning? One's first instinct is to get tough. Tell recipient countries what's what. No family planning plan, no economic assistance. If aid can be tied - as it increasingly is - to the practice of democracy, why not tie it to the lessons of demography? The answer given by contemporary best practitioners is subtle. The strategy of Britain's Overseas Development Administration is 'children by choice not chance'; its brochure of that title speaks of enabling women to take greater control over their lives. The ODA will contribute Pounds 9m to UNFPA projects this year; the US Agency for International Development shells out not a cent, owing to a tight reading of a 1985 Congressional amendment to an aid bill and a misplaced connection between UNFPA and enforced sterilisations and abortions in China. That ancient quarrel should be patched up. The AID administration can do it. Meanwhile, the US remains the world's largest donor of bilateral aid for population programmes, at Dollars 250m this year. It, too, focuses on the status of women. This is understandable. Women who are educated choose to have fewer children. Better health and ante-natal services also reduce the voluntary birth rate. A hard-faced demand from rich countries to poor ones to restrain population growth would be counter-productive; a willingness to help release women from constant childbearing and hard labour is broadly acceptable. Some, however, reject even that. Catholic countries, as in Latin America, are under the sway of Rome's doctrine on birth control. Can this be right? Only the Devil could want to destroy the world by overpopulating it. Others, like Malawi, will not see that there is a problem to be faced. The two giants have followed different paths. China, with its uniquely harsh measures, has cut its fertility rate to 2.3 per woman; India, which is making good progress for a democracy, has only managed to get it down to 4.1. The focus on womens' rights works well, but a little nudge from big lenders might also help. In the World Bank's 1991 economic report on India there is a table devoted to family planning methods and estimates of 'births averted'. The cumulative total of the latter since 1956 is 136m. That is at least a start. The Bank could do more, if its members would let it.
19920713000000000	FT  13 JUL 92 / Survey of Japan (3): A Japanese-style recession - The economy. WORDS such as 'disaster' and 'horror' are increasingly entering the vocabulary of economists describing Japan. As each month's statistics are released by the government, economists search for a sign that the economy, rapidly plunging, is about to hit bottom. Instead, and despite repeated government assurances to the contrary, the accumulated evidence points towards an extended period of weak demand, falling production and dismal corporate profits. The turning point towards renewed growth is increasingly elusive. Of course, this is still a Japanese-style recession that is unlikely to meet the standard economist's definition of two quarters consecutive decline. Economic growth this year is likely to reach at least 2 per cent, and employment remains at high levels. But the manufacturing sector is in steep decline, financial markets are devastated, and the contraction of demand has stemmed the flow of imports, pushing up Japan's already large trade surplus and angering its trading partners. The latest 'horror' came at the end of June, when the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) reported a decline of 8.7 per cent in industrial output during May, compared to a year ago. A sharp drop in industrial output was by itself expected, and in principle it was a healthy sign because it showed that manufacturers were making efforts to cut back high levels of unsold goods in inventory by reducing the flow from the factory. Yet in this case, although in May there was the steepest year-to-year fall in manufacturing since 1975, bloated inventories also edged up by a seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent - because the flow of goods out of inventory to the market also slowed as demand contracted. The Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance officially expect the period of inventory adjustment - when inventories decline to normal levels that allow manufacturers to restore production cuts - to last until the autumn. Salomon Brothers Asia, however, now believes the turning point is unlikely to come before the spring of 1993. To bring inventory levels back to historical trends by November, manufacturers would have to cut output by 1 per cent a month, which Salomon Brothers believes is unrealistically severe. The government case for optimism is based in part on the most recent Tankan, or short-term economic survey. The survey uncovered an unexpectedly sharp decline in business confidence in May, which hit the lowest level in five years. But the survey also showed that manufacturers were expecting a modest improvement in business conditions by September. Corporate profits were expected to grow in the second half of the fiscal year by 17 per cent, after declining by 22.5 per cent in the first half. The government interpreted the Tankan to mean that the economy had hit bottom. Financial markets plunged after the survey was released, but not so much because of the Tankan itself. It was, instead, the government's optimism - which appeared to dampen prospects either for an emergency government spending package or a cut in interest rates - that sent markets reeling. The government's relative lack of alarm is easy to understand. Hardly anyone these days expects the government's growth forecast of 3.5 per cent in the year to next March to be realised. But the expected 2 per cent or better would be considered respectable anywhere else in the industrialised world. The government can additionally comfort itself that unemployment is negligible, at 2.1 per cent, compared to an average of 6.4 per cent in the seven largest industrialised economies. The labour market is softening and overtime and bonus awards are being cut, but the direct human cost of the slowdown is small. The government is also deeply fearful about rekindling inflation. With Japan's consumer prices now increasing at about 2.5 per cent annually, this fear looks ill-founded. But what haunts both the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan is the underlying tightness in the labour market, where a structural shortage of manpower results from Japan's declining birth rate. Indeed, the frequently proposed solution for the economy - to spend money on public works - would pour money into the construction industry where the labour shortage is most keenly felt. The government could easily re-ignite wage inflation with an overly hasty attempt to jump-start the economy. In the end, though, the government is certain to act, if only because Japan has come under intense international pressure to increase domestic demand, boost imports and help to pull the rest of the world out of the economic slump. Already, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has proposed a programme of public works that would result in some Y6,000bn to Y7,000bn of extra spending. A decision will come in the autumn. The rapid growth in the economy in the late 1980s, accompanied by easy money policies, temporarily put off the day when companies would have to face the fact that Japan is becoming less accommodating to manufacturing industries. Now, with labour both in short supply and expensive, land prices sky high, roads choked with traffic, and the cost of capital having risen sharply, this fact is inescapable.
19921026000000000	FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (11): Imbalance between young and old - Population trends / Births down 40 per cent in the east. ECONOMICALLY speaking, a child is a costly luxury. No longer do people need to breed to ensure that they are looked after in old age or to engender a home-grown workforce for the fields. Emotional factors alone ensure that people continue to have children. This is a phenomenon of all urbanised, modern industrial societies, but the consequences are felt particularly acutely in Germany, the third least fertile country in the European Community after Italy and Spain: Germany's population is growing old, and it would be shrinking but for an influx of foreigners. Expressed in pictorial form, a population ought to look like a pyramid: a broad base of younger people supporting a dwindling number of older ones. Germany's population now looks more like a Christmas tree, the pyramid thinned out by the effects of two world wars, but 40 years from now, the picture will look less balanced: an inverse pyramid where relatively few young people support layers of older people. 'For the present generation simply to replace itself, 40 per cent of all married couples need to have three or more children,' says Professor Charlotte Hohn, director of the Wiesbaden-based Federal Institute for Population Research. 'But in a society such as ours, most people want to have one child - or two, at the most.' Germany's reunification has highlighted the growing numerical imbalance between young and old: in 1991, the number of births in reunited Germany fell back by 8.5 per cent, from 906,000 in 1990 to 828,000, a drop caused by a huge, 40 per cent reduction of births in the former east Germany. A combination of social unease, migration to the western part of Germany, plus growing job opportunities, has meant that young women in the ex-DDR have been reluctant to have children, and hospitals in the east report a surge in demand for abortions and sterilisations. The resulting demographic problem is often cited as one of the more serious difficulties facing Germany in the years to come: Germans have the highest wages, take the longest holidays, work the shortest hours of their peers in other industrial countries - and to cap it all there are set to be fewer people at work to support a disproportionately large elderly population. The government has taken a number of steps to mitigate the problem, for example raising the retirement age and adjusting old-age healthcare insurance regulations. But this is not enough: in order to shore up the imbalanced population pyramid, Germany will have to rely more heavily on imported labour. That the working population of the former west Germany climbed from 28.6m to 29.4m between January and October last year reflects migration from the former DDR as well as the influx of ethnic Germans (Aussiedler), predominantly from the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe, who are entitled to German citizenship. But more jobs were lost in east Germany than were created in the west and if the workforce is to grow across the whole of Germany, the number of foreigners living in Germany will have to expand, as it did in the last decade when a net 2.2m people migrated into Germany. Over the longer term the number of foreigners in Germany will grow anyway: the 5.4m-strong foreign community in Germany now is expected to grow to 8.9m over the next 40 years, without immigration. Although not German citizens, these foreigners - predominantly Turks - have come to look on Germany as home and, having paid their taxes, are entitled to the same care in old age as other Germans. Senior industrialists already recognise the imperative of attracting more skilled immigrants into Germany: some 230,000 apprenticeships are unfilled and in united Germany there are over 400,000 job vacancies for skilled manual workers. Employers and employee associations bend over backwards to say they would welcome qualified applicants for these jobs, whatever their nationality, and Mr Rudolf Stumpf, personnel director of BMW, has said that the car company may as well shut if it were not for its foreign workers. At a time when the number of ethnic Germans will be shrinking, this growth may exacerbate social tensions which are already to be felt in the early 1990s in the attacks against asylum homes in the east of Germany. It is an irony that asylum seekers are not allowed to work even though there would be jobs for them: they are obliged to sit around doing nothing for months at the state's expenses while they wait for a decision on their asylum application, serving to stoke up resentments within the communities in the midst of whom they are billeted. As Mr Heiner Geissler, deputy chairman of the ruling CDU-CSU coalition pointed out this summer in the wake of the attacks, more tolerance is required and Germans will have to get used to living and working in an increasingly multi-racial society.
19921030000000000	FT  30 OCT 92 / Baltic troop withdrawal suspended. PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin signed an order yesterday suspending the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic states because of concern for the rights of Russians living there, Itar-Tass news agency said, Reuter reports from Moscow. It said the pullout from the former Soviet republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania would resume only when agreements had been signed with all three on its form and on the social rights of soldiers and their families. 'The president's decision is connected with his deep concern at numerous violations of the rights of the Russian-speaking population in the above states,' Tass said. Mr Yeltsin's move was the strongest yet to counter what Moscow regards as human rights infringements against the large Russian minorities, particularly in Latvia and Estonia. Tass said he instructed the Russian Foreign Ministry to draft an appeal to the United Nations asking the world community to investigate human rights in the Baltics. Mr Yeltsin also ordered the Russian government to draft agreements with the three states to safeguard 'social guarantees' for Russian soldiers on their soil. The Russian leader said Moscow would make economic agreements with the Baltics dependent on observance of the soldiers' rights. All three rely heavily on Russia for energy and other supplies. Russia has reserved its heaviest recent criticism for Estonia, where Russians and other minorities making up some 40 per cent of the population were excluded from parliamentary and presidential elections last month because they have no automatic right to Estonian citizenship. Moscow formally protested to Estonia last week, warning that serious ethnic conflict could erupt there. The Russian Defence Ministry said last week the withdrawal of troops would be temporarily suspended because of problems rehousing the soldiers in Russia. Russia's birth rate has fallen by 12 per cent this year, apparently due to economic hardship and falling living standards, the National Statistics Committee said yesterday. With deaths outnumbering births in 41 of Russia's 77 regions, the country's population fell by 72,000 in the first nine months of the year.
19921106000000000	FT  06 NOV 92 / German health bill raises temperature: Dentists and doctors are preparing to defy rare party consensus. GERMANY'S opposition Social Democrats call it 'an historic opportunity'. Chancellor Helmut Kohl has praised it as one of the great success stories of his otherwise lacklustre administration. Mr Horst Seehofer, his health minister, describes it as 'the most far-reaching reform in the history of the statutory health insurance scheme'. The object of their rare mutual admiration is the remarkable political compromise between all four big parties - the three in the ruling coalition and the Social Democrats (SPD) - on a health reform plan to curb the soaring costs of medical and dental care in Germany. The bill was given a first reading in parliament yesterday. Thanks to the agreement between the parties, it seems certain to become law in record time, and is supposed to start saving DM11bn (Pounds 4.4bn) a year from January. It proposes a combination of a drugs price cut followed by a two-year price freeze, a fixed list of drugs that may be publicly prescribed, and penalties for doctors who over-prescribe. There is also to be a reduction in fees for dentists, a limit on the number of doctors who may be registered in the state-backed health scheme, a compulsory retirement age (68) for doctors and dentists, and increased contributions from patients for hospital care and drug prescriptions. Overall, it provides for a complex series of controls on medical care - down to the number of false teeth installed on a bridge or the number of pills in a medicine packet - in order to cut costs. Despite the political consensus on the issue, virtually the entire health industry has denounced the reform as irrelevant and illogical: a political compromise which simply bears no relation to reality. The only ones in favour are the state-backed health insurance institutions, which are desperate to reduce a deficit which stands at DM5.5bn this year. Without the planned savings, in 1993 the deficit will nearly double. Perhaps it is inevitable that the 'industry' is protesting: the doctors, dentists, drug companies and hospitals will in effect be financing DM8.2bn of the cuts, and the patients only about DM2.8bn. The 43,000 dentists are threatening to walk out of the statutory health service en masse, and in future provide treatment privately. They claim the reform amounts to creeping state control of an independent health system. The pharmacists claim that up to 30 per cent of medicines will no longer be available to public health service patients. And they say they will challenge the deal all the way to the constitutional court. The 75,000 public health service doctors have described the scheme as 'disguised euthanasia'. The drugs companies have been more reserved, saying it is a 'missed opportunity for a more comprehensive reform of the health service'. Mr Seehofer says that the whole system has become extravagant: that Germany has too many doctors, too many hospital beds and consumes far too many medicines. The price, he maintains, has increased disproportionately: insurance contributions have been rising inexorably as a proportion of individual wages, reaching 12.2 per cent in 1990, 12.6 per cent today, and by next year probably 13 per cent. The doctors say that he is missing the point, and that behind the financial crisis lies a classic demographic dilemma: Germany's population is rapidly ageing, and the birth rate is dropping. In 1950, the over-60s accounted for just 14.5 per cent of the population. By 1975 that had reached 20.4 per cent and by by 2020 it will reach 26.7 per cent, or more than one in four of the population, 'The pensioners pay a very small insurance contribution, but they are getting older all the time, and their incidence of illness is growing very sharply,' says Mr Klaus Noldner, chief executive of the Hartmannbund, the doctors' lobby group. While the volume and value of medical treatment is increasing, the number of wage-earners paying for it is stagnating. The proportion of GNP devoted to health care has remained at around 5.5 per cent since 1975, Mr Noldner insists. But wages as a proportion of national income have declined, providing a second reason why the proportion of wages going on health care has increased so steadily. What the latest health reforms fail entirely to do is tackle that underlying problem, he says. 'We need a completely new financing system. If the law says that wage contributions must be fixed, financing must be found outside the system.' The doctors believe one answer is to impose a proportion of all health care costs on the patient - a direction in which the Seehofer reform package moves very cautiously. Patients will in future have to pay DM3 or DM5 or DM7 towards medicines, depending on their expense and the quantity prescribed. Another possibility is a two-tier system of basic treatment - financed by the health insurance scheme - and voluntary treatment, privately financed. The dentists believe the two-tier system is also inevitable. They are particularly furious because they say the reform, which would see them take a 10 per cent cut in fees for false teeth and bridge treatment, follows a slight decline in their own income and turnover since 1980. The dentists' association is collecting sworn statements from those ready to quit the public system. It will call out members if 75 per cent agree to go. With the entire political establishment versus the health lobby, the temperature is still set to rise. FT  06 NOV 92 / Survey of Ireland (3): Undeterred by recession - 'A successful unemployed economy'. depending on your viewpoint. Low inflation, sustained growth and a healthy trade surplus add up to a classic textbook case of good economic management. The appendix would have to point out, though, that almost a quarter of the 3.5m population is marginalised from the mainstream economy, and a substantial proportion more has little to show for that good economic management. In Dublin, the carefully-tended gardens of the middle- and upper-class neighbourhoods of the 'southside' - south of the river Liffey, which bisects the city - give an aura of genteel prosperity. The only hint of anxiety is the ubiquitous burglar alarm, now to be seen on almost any house with a reasonable coat of paint. (It could probably rate alongside the personal computer as a yardstick of the occupant's standard-of-living.) City centre restaurants, with their uniformly expensive menus, seem invariably to be full, and doing a thriving business. On the other side of the Liffey on the 'northside' where lower-middle class and working class neighbourhoods predominate, the pubs, supermarkets and fast-food shops continue to ring up profits, but their trade is increasingly being financed by transfers from the exchequer in the form of welfare and unemployment benefits. Despite the recession, Ireland continues to have one of the fastest-growing economies in the European Community, averaging 5 per cent growth per annum over the past five years. But it also has the longest dole queues; grown longer by 30 per cent over the past two years. By the end of 1992 unemployment is projected to pass 300,000, over 21 per cent of the labour force; easily the highest in the EC. This has prompted one sarcastic commentator to remark that Ireland has 'one of the most successful unemployed economies in the world.' Two things explain this ambiguity: Ireland's demographic trends, and its membership of the narrow band of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) within the EC. Although the birth rate has fallen to about 50,000 live births per annum, from 70,000 10 years ago, there will be no significant reduction in the number of people entering the labour market until the end of the decade. Emigration, the traditional escape valve for those unable to find work in Ireland, has declined from an average 30,000 per year in the late 1980s to only 1,000 last year - because of recession in the UK and the US. Meanwhile the government's policy to maintain a strong punt within the ERM has severely restricted exchequer freedom to borrow and spend. This has had a deflationary effect on employment and domestic demand, but has created a stable macro-economic environment, attractive to export-orientated inward investment. It is that sector which has shown the most dramatic growth in recent years. Merchandise exports are expected to be up by 10 per cent this year, while manufacturing output is predicted to grow by 7 per cent. This impressive performance is now under threat. In September sterling abandoned the ERM and floated downwards. Some 32 per cent of Irish exports are destined for the UK; about 42 percent of imports are sourced there. The financial markets, having overwhelmed sterling, turned on the punt, anticipating that the government would be forced into a devaluation. The government, however, has held firm. Using its remnant exchange controls (which are scheduled to be abolished by the end of the year), raising interest rates by 3 percentage points, and borrowing abroad to rebuild reserves lost in defending the punt in the first speculative rush in September, it has managed to throw together a credible defence of the punt. Upon this the entire edifice of Ireland's economic policy is structured. Maintaining the punt's link to the DM is Ireland's passport to the 'inner-core' of hard-currency EC states, which may press ahead with plans for monetary union and a single currency if a two-speed EC eventually emerges out of the ERM crisis. There is almost unanimous agreement across Irish political party lines, and between employers' organisations and trade unions, that to link the fate of the Irish economy to that of sterling and the UK's ailing economy would be a fatal error. The question is whether the very high real interest rates now being suffered by the economy, currently in excess of 11 per cent, will prove more damaging than sterling's devaluation. Mr Bertie Ahern, the Irish finance minister says: 'The real level of interest rate is far too high, and for the performance of the economy is almost ridiculous . . .if the Germans move (to lower rates) this side of Christmas, it will allow us to do so as well, but we will have to live with high interest rates certainly for this quarter. (Then) in 1993 we would be trying to roll back that 3 per cent increase.' Mr John Bruton, leader of Fine Gael, the opposition party, accuses the government of having 'a foreign exchange policy but not an economic policy'. He is arguing for thorough structural reforms in the economy - a sweeping reform of the tax legislation which currently encourages capital-intensive investment but discourages labour-intensive investment. High national insurance contributions should be reduced and income tax bands widened to encourage investment and job creation, he says. Mr Ahern has a worried eye on next year's budget. This year the target of an exchequer borrowing requirement of IPounds 590m, or 2.4 per cent, looks likely to be met. Next year a 9 per cent rise in the public sector wage bill is already locked in through outstanding agreements with the unions. This leaves stark choices: either to abandon the convergence criteria for EC monetary union, or implement significant spending cuts in public services. With a general election looming, neither one of these is a politically soft option.
19930122000000000	FT  22 JAN 93 / N African birth rate falls steeply. THE population explosion in North Africa is over, according to a leading French demographer, Prof Youssef Courbage, writes Edward Mortimer. Birth rates in the region are falling rapidly, and European fears of a flood of Arab immigrants are wildly exaggerated, Mr Courbage told a conference in Brussels yesterday. In fact, he added, the working-age population in Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia will level off in about 2005, when the number of job applicants will begin to decrease. 'Just as Europe's bulging baby-boom generation leaves working life for retirement, and will need to rely on a sufficient labour force - foreign workers in particular - to finance it, the Maghreb labour markets, where labour will be in short supply, will be hard-pressed to meet export demands.' Mr Courbage, a senior researcher at the Institut National d'Etudes Demographiques in Paris, was speaking at a workshop on Europe and the Mediterranean at the Centre for European Policy Studies. The decrease in fertility in the Maghreb countries is acknowledged by the UN and the World Bank, he said, but those organisations had not yet taken the full measure of the decline. The UN had significantly overestimated fertility in all three countries.
19930224000000000	FT  24 FEB 93 / Poland poised to be a post-communist success story: But eastern Europe's beacon of stability is showing signs of strain. POST-COMMUNIST Europe needs a success story. It is beginning to look as though Poland, which was the first to shake off the communist yoke and the first to embark on 'shock therapy' economic reforms, might provide one. After three years of industrial decline when production slumped 40 per cent and unemployment climbed from zero to 13 per cent of the workforce, the economy stabilised last year. Strong export growth to western markets, a fast growing private sector and signs of greater efficiency in the public sector have combined to produce sharp productivity gains and the basis of an export-led economy. Poland appears poised for sustained economic growth which the government hopes will double GDP over the next decade. But the pain is far from over. Officially, more than 40 per cent of Polish families survived at minimum income levels last year, according to central planning office figures. These underestimate the extent of moon-lighting and the under-reporting of real wage and profit levels for tax evasion purposes. But there are also clear signs of social strain. Last year the birth rate was the lowest in 50 years and the death rate was at its highest since the second world war. A third of the population, around 13m people, live in ecologically risky areas. Official unemployment, while slackening in pace, is still rising; it will exceed 3m, or 16 per cent of the work force, before hopefully peaking later this year, provided the slowdown in Germany and the rest of EC markets does not curb export-led job creation. There is a sense that the worst is over and that a period of economic and social development lies ahead. Production is rising at the new foreign and Polish-owned plants that are mushrooming. State-owned enterprises are also responding to market disciplines introduced over the last three years. It is not only central Warsaw that gives the impression of a boom-town, with aircraft and hotels full of western businessmen, streets crowded with imported cars and increasingly sophisticated shops. Economic activity and change in neighbouring countries - such as Ukraine and Germany - are fuelling Poland's entrepreneurial activity. The eastern border has become, in effect, the new border between east and west, although as the recent 35-nation interior ministers meeting in Budapest revealed, this is not a status with which Warsaw is happy. Poland as seen from the east now looks like a beacon of stability and modest prosperity. The fear is that the country will attract economic refugees like moths to a light if the economic and political situation to the east deteriorates, as looks probable. Warsaw has its own problems. It has to keep the budget deficit within the 5 per cent of GDP level agreed with the International Monetary Fund. This means a tight rein on spending, the introduction of VAT and measures to broaden its tax base and improve tax collection. Next month the IMF is expected to approve a Dollars 660m standby loan whose symbolic importance far exceeds its financial value. A new agreement will be seen as a vote of confidence in Poland's ability to maintain stable government and pursue structural reforms. The three years of deep recession which followed the 'shock therapy' imposed by Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, the then finance minister, killed hyper-inflation and forced Polish companies to seek new export markets in the west. This process was re-inforced by the subsequent collapse in trade with the former Soviet Union. Since the middle of last year, however, the first tentative signs of an upturn in industrial production and economic growth have multiplied. Until now Poland, the most populous of the former Soviet satellites with an internal market of 39m people, has received far less foreign investment than Hungary or the Czech Republic. but has the most entrepreneurial private sector. But unlike its neighbours it is spared the ethnic tensions which have split Czechoslovakia, complicated Hungary's relations with its neighbours and led to civil war in Yugoslavia and along the southern borders of Russia. The growth potential of Poland is attracting attention from strategic investors, including US and European pension funds and other institutions. Next month's expected IMF agreement will unlock more than Dollars 1bn in structural adjustment loans from the World Bank, permit completion of the second stage of the Paris Club agreement on a 50 per cent reduction in Poland's Dollars 33bn official debt, and facilitate negotiations with the London Club for a similar reduction in more than Dollars 12bn of commercial debt. The IMF agreement is also expected to facilitate redeployment of the untouched Dollars 1bn zloty stabilisation fund created by donations and loans from the US and other western governments in 1990 to underpin zloty convertibility. It was not needed but now Warsaw is trying to persuade donors that the fund should be converted to clean up bank balance sheets prior to privatisation. The climate for private investment is also expected to improve. The largest single project to date is Fiat's Dollars 2bn commitment to build small cars in Poland. This has attracted matching investments from Fiat's traditional suppliers, including Dollars 200m from Lucchini which is modernising the Huta Warszawa steel plant, and smaller machine tool and component companies attracted by Poland's low wage costs and high skill levels. More than 50 per cent of output now comes from the private sector which employs 56 per cent of the labour force. International Paper, Pilkington and Unilever are three of the lengthening list of multinational investors. while increasingly Poland is attracting smaller investors such as a Danish shoe company which is setting up three plants there. They employ 150 people each at wages comparable to the Far East and the company is also buying cheap, high quality Polish hides. As with other EC producers the Danish company finds it cheaper and more efficient to sew leather uppers to soles in Poland and ship the finished goods by truck than spend a fortune on air-freight.
19930323000000000	FT  23 MAR 93 / Wave of immigration at new peak: Western Europe and North America each take over 1m a year in 1991 and 1992. WESTERN Europe and North America each received more than 1m immigrants in 1991 and 1992, a United Nations Conference on European population, which opens today in Geneva, is to be told. The total, mainly relatives joining earlier immigrants and a new wave of asylum seekers, is higher than the previous peak in the early 1960s, according to Mr David Coleman, a demographer at Oxford University. Immigrants are not generally economically beneficial to their host countries, he argues, although they may solve short-term labour problems. 'Only around 60 per cent of the potential workforce in western Europe is actually working and there is plenty of slack to cope with future labour demand,' he says. The past availability of cheap labour may be one factor behind Europe's relative lack of investment in high technology industries, he adds. The immigration numbers include 250,000 leaving Yugoslavia last year. Germany last year took 438,000 asylum seekers, two thirds of the European total. But so far 'it is Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia which are taking the brunt of Russians, gipsies and Romanians from the east,' Mr Coleman says. An outbreak of fighting in Russia could intensify the pressure for westward migration, and pressure will come too from the projected rise of nearly 2bn in the populations of the south Mediterranean, tropical Africa and south Asia in the next 12 years. The conference, one of five regional debates before next year's UN World Population Conference in Cairo, is expected to call for more money to be spent on family planning to curb high rates of population growth in developing countries. The UN Population Fund wants the total amount of money spent each year to double from the present level of Dollars 4.5bn by the year 2000. Developed countries contribute only Dollars 800m of the total, and the Population Fund the main UN family planning agency, has seen its budget frozen at Dollars 238m. The conference will also hear warnings that current projections of the world's population could need considerable revision. By the year 2050, the world's stable population could be anywhere between 5bn and 20bn, according to Mr Miroslav Macura, of the UN Economic Commission for Europe. Present estimates of a doubling in population from the present 5.5bn by that date could be altered by small changes in fertility rates, he said. Scientists are also arguing that traditional assumptions between economic development and falling birth rates - captured in the phrase 'Development is the best contraception' - no longer appear true. Gulf states have seen fertility rates - the average family size if the current birth rate were maintained - of around three, compared to a European average of around 1.7, despite a huge increase in wealth. Mr Macura also points out that Thailand, Sri Lanka, and Bulgaria have seen sharp falls in birth rate despite low prosperity levels. Social changes in Europe are causing sharp fluctuations in birth rate. East German fertility rates, which were 1.6 before German unification compared to West Germany's 1.4, have now fallen to 0.8 because of uncertainty. However the increasing prosperity of Italy and Spain is thought to be responsible for the fall in fertility rates to about 1.2, below West German levels.
19930421000000000	FT  21 APR 93 / Observer: Multiplication. There are just too few babies in Japan. Seiroku Kajiyama, secretary-general of the ruling Liberal Democratic party, says so. And furthermore that is the prime reason for the faltering competitiveness of the country. One of a family of 10, Kajiyama told a seminar of female LDP supporters that large families foster a competitive spirit. 'You don't need to have as many as 10, three to five would do,' he said, explaining that the stampede for food at the dinner table encourages the survival instinct. Some senior LDP officials seem to be obsessed with the fact that women are choosing to have longer careers and fewer children, leaving Japan with a birth rate of 9.8 per 1,000 last year, the lowest recorded. The figure prompted Kajiyama to compare modern Japan to failed socialist societies, which he thinks lacked the fierce entrepreneurial spirit that big families inspire. Kajiyama's homespun theory is a contribution to the debate over the rise of the shinjinrui, the 'new type of people' - those who, unlike their forebears, are willing to take holidays, swap jobs and generally enjoy themselves. The very people, indeed, who would have the time to produce the babies he is so keen to see.
19930422000000000	FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (13): Fewer children mean a better life - A look at the progress of the government's family planning programme. In a large, shabby room in old Cairo's Zeinhom district, a small gathering of headscarfed women is waiting to see Dr Mawaheb El-Mouelhy. 'There is no excuse for not using birth control in Egypt,' says Dr El-Mouelhy, who has been running the family planning clinic since 1986. 'Anyone who wants it, can get it.' Certainly the Egyptian government has been very active in promoting family planning since 1985 when the National Population Council was established. A blunt television campaign tells women that fewer children will mean a better life. On street corners, billboards urge parents to content themselves with two babies. There has been assistance too, from the Grand Mufti, Egypt's highest authority on Islamic jurisprudence. In a pamphlet entitled 'Birth Planning and the Religious Point of View,' he declared that family planning did not contradict the teachings of Allah. The NPC has an office in every region of the country. Under a programme sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development, Egypt has been flooded with highly subsidised intra-uterine devices (IUDs). The official figures are impressive. Total births per year have dropped from 1.92m in 1988 to 1.65m last year. The birth rate has fallen from 39.8 per 1,000 in 1985 to 29.9 per 1000. The contraceptive prevalence rate - women of child-bearing age using contraception - has risen from 24.2 per cent at the beginning of the 1980s to 47.6 per cent at the beginning of this decade. Unfortunately these figures cannot mask the fact that the total population is increasing by over 1m a year, and that at current rates it will take only 30 years for it to double to 114m. The Egyptian Gazette, an English language daily, poured scorn on the official population statistics earlier this month. It quoted from a report which put the total population about 2m higher than the official count of 56.434m. In spite of efforts by the government and aid agencies, Egypt's heavily burdened resources are coming under too much pressure - 98 per cent of the population live on 4 per cent of the land. A short drive out of Cairo along the Nile is enough to see how crowded the thin strips of green either side of the river have become. Dr Sobhi Abdel-Hakim, professor of population studies at Cairo University, says that the government's target is to reach a total fertility rate of 2 per cent, at which point the population would be replacing itself. He believes this can be achieved by the year 2025, but the areas outside Cairo and Alexandria continue to present an enormous challenge. Statistics culled from the rural communities of upper Egypt are significantly less impressive than those from the big cities - tradition and lack of resources combine to hinder the progress of the campaign. One aid official pointed out that the proportion of women of childbearing age using contraception - to over 40 per cent since methods of birth control became easily accessible - reflects a demand that was already there. 'These are the women who wanted to use contraception but never had access,' he says. 'It is going to take a much greater effort, and much more investment in information campaigns, to persuade those who are reluctant.' Although the NPC is represented in every governorate of Egypt, Dr Maher Mahran, chairman of the NPC, says that doctors - female doctors in particular - are reluctant to work outside the big towns. The government is trying to reach rural communities with mobile units, but low resources mean that the effort is very stretched. The biggest block to progress in rural areas remains poverty. Dr Mouelhy tells the story of Zeinab, in her late thirties, pregnant for the tenth time. Zeinab and her husband, a farmer, were proud of it; they told Dr El Mouelhy that one more child meant two more helping hands. Poor education - especially education of women - and the tradition of marrying young is also widespread. Dr Mouelhy, who sees up to 40 women a day at the Cairo clinic, says it is unusual to meet a woman of 20, particularly in rural areas, who has not already had a child. Girls usually leave school at 11 and are often married by 14, although the legal minimum age for marriage is 16. Moreover, parents tend to keep reproducing until a son has been born. There are also fears that the rise of Islamic fundamentalism will work against government and aid agency efforts to bring down the birth rate. Although the Grand Mufti has spoken in favour of family planning, some imams have been preaching against it in local mosques. 'The feminist movement is going downhill here,' says Dr Mouelhy. 'We were the pioneers of the movement in the Middle East, but now it is going backwards.' While the government is committed to the work of the NPC - scarcely a speech passes President Hosni Mubarak's lips without some reference to the problem of population growth - those in the field feel the government should do more to promote the cause. About a quarter of the funds spent on family planning in Egypt comes from the government, but about 25 per cent of it is in kind, through air time on television and radio. 'Mubarak doesn't put his money where his mouth is,' says one aid official. 'The government doesn't provide enough of a budget to the population council so it can't be as effective as it should be.' He worries that the increase in the contraception prevalence rate is artificial, and that the moment USAID stops providing IUDs, it will drop back. Although Dr Mahran is pleased with the progress of the NPC's work, he remains outspoken about the lack of funds. 'The most serious issue is time,' he says. 'The clock is ticking in Egypt and each time you postpone a project by just six months, you lose a lot. We have reached a critical stage.' Back at the Zeinhom clinic, Dr Mouelhy reflects that when she started work there in 1986, she rarely saw a woman seeking contraception after just one child. 'The traditional belief that a woman's only job is to produce children is still strong here,' she says. 'But we now see women who want to spread out their families, or take a break from pregnancy, and it gives me such a thrill to see women and children in good health.'
19930517000000000	FT  17 MAY 93 / In the eye of a gathering storm: A look at the political and economic challenges facing the new Turkish president. Until yesterday, when he was elected president of the Turkish republic, Suleyman Demirel was head of a coalition government formed by his own True Path party (DYP) and the Social-Democratic People's party (SHP), led by deputy prime minister Erdal Inonu. The immediate questions now facing Turkey are whether that coalition will continue, and who will replace Mr Demirel as prime minister. But behind those questions lie others of much greater importance, not only for Turkey but for Europe, the western alliance, the Middle East and much of the former Soviet Union. The mere enumeration of those regions shows how the end of the cold war, far from robbing Turkey of its strategic importance as once seemed likely, has promoted it to the very eye of the storm. Some American strategists even argue that Turkey has replaced Germany as the US's most important ally. That is an exaggeration, no doubt, but Turkey has replaced Germany as Nato's most exposed member. It finds itself surrounded by, and involved in, three zones of conflict - the Balkans, the Caucasus and Iraq - while a fourth neighbour, Iran, is seen as threatening both by the Turkish elite and by Turkey's Nato allies. The kind of role Turkey can play in these multiple crises will depend mainly on how, over the next year or two, it handles its domestic problems. For it is not only the external environment that has changed. In what will probably be known as the Ozal years (after President Turgut Ozal who died last month), the country has experienced significant internal change as well. Its economy has been largely deregulated and opened up to foreign investment. The growth rate last year was the highest in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (5.9 per cent), but inflation is running at about 60 per cent and population, now nearly 60m, is growing at some 2 per cent a year. The birth rate is falling, though, and projections of 120m Turks by the year 2025 are certainly too high. But even more spectacular, and socially more destabilising, is the process of urbanisation. In just five years, between 1985 and 1990, the proportion of people living in cities jumped from 53 to 59 per cent. It could well be 80 per cent by 2000. The flow of both capital and population has been from east to west, accentuating the sharp gap in income and living standards between different parts of the country. To see that as an ethnic division is too simple. The mainly Turkish north-east is as poor as the Kurdish south-east, and Kurds as much as Turks have joined in the westward migration. But the insurgency in the south-eastern part of the country since 1984 has forced the issue of Kurdish identity on to the Turkish political agenda, after six decades of denial and repression. This has happened while Turks in the rest of the country have been feeling their way back to democracy after the military coup of 1980 (the third in 20 years). Constitutional provisions banning politically-affiliated trade unions and political parties based on class or religious ideologies have been gradually lifted, and efforts have been made to improve respect for human rights. But the Demirel government's bill on judicial practices, passed last year and intended to give defendants the same rights as in other western countries, has yet to be extended to terrorist cases. Reports of human rights violations continue to flow in from south-eastern Turkey, where a state of emergency allows the security services a free hand in the struggle against terrorism. Economic freedom, Kurdish identity, political pluralism: all these mark steps away from the legacy of the republic's founder Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, at least as traditionally understood and jealously defended by the Turkish armed forces. But the centrepiece of that legacy for most Turks is secularism, and that too is seen by some as being under threat. Leading secular journalists and academics have been the victims of assassination squads, allegedly trained in Iran, while the legal but overtly Islamic Welfare party (RP) did well in local elections last year, and appears to be increasing its influence. Turkey's present leaders, and most diplomatic observers, remain convinced the RP can not win more than about 15 per cent of the national vote. Seventy years of westernisation could not be easily reversed, and Turkey is used to thinking of itself as a European country. Its secular middle class is larger, more self-confident and more unashamedly western in outlook than the corresponding group in most other Moslem countries. Only if real disaster strikes could this class lose its hegemonic role in the country and anything like an Islamic counter-revolution take place. But disaster cannot be ruled out, because the political class faces more immediate challenges than an ill-defined 'Islamic threat'. The crucial question in the next two or three years will be the management of the economy. Although Turkey's recent history is an economic success story, and the income of most social groups has kept pace with inflation, few suppose this happy state of affairs can be maintained unless the government regains control over the public sector borrowing requirement, currently running at about 13 per cent of gross national product a year. It is hard to see how it can do so without closing uneconomic state companies and causing a sharp increase in unemployment, in a country which still lacks a social safety net. Customs union with the European Community, promised by the end of 1995, offers real hope to many small businesses in Turkey, especially if the Community lives up to its promises on textile imports. But other sectors, such as cars, are ill-prepared for foreign competition; and the phasing-out of the 'mass housing fund', currently levied on imports, will deprive the government of an important source of revenue. Even more urgent is the situation in the south-east, where the ceasefire declared by the separatist Kurdistan Workers' party in March offers a chance to end the civil war, but only if bold decisions are taken quickly. If the ceasefire holds, the state of emergency will probably soon be lifted, but that will be very risky unless measures are also taken to canalise Kurdish political aspirations into non-violent channels. Allowing the use of the language in schools and broadcasts, and allowing political parties based explicitly on Kurdish identity, are the most widely canvassed ways of doing this. Will Turkey have a government capable of taking such bold decisions? It is far from certain. Mr Demirel himself, by nature a cautious man, will probably favour a colourless successor as prime minister - for instance the present interior minister, Mr Ismet Sezgin - rather than someone as radical and novel as Mrs Tansu Ciller, the economy minister. Nor does the party structure of Turkish politics, reflecting the legacy of the 1980 coup, make for clear and decisive government. The present coalition partners, DYP and SHP, were brought together by hostility to President Ozal rather than by any ideological affinity. A two-party system, uniting DYP with Ozal's Motherland party as the main conservative force, and SHP with Mr Deniz Baykal's Republican People's party on the left, would make a lot more sense following the death of Ozal and now that a new generation is coming to the fore. But such a political shake-up, threatening to the personal positions of most established leaders, would take one or two years at least to come about. Those are not years that Turkey can afford to waste.
19930614000000000	FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (13): Escaping Islam's past - The role of women in society. ONE OF the key reasons President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali is opposed to granting legal recognition to the al Nahda (Renaissance) opposition party - whose creed is Islam - is fear that such a move risks undoing what many Tunisians regard as their country's proudest achievement since independence; the corpus of laws which, in 1956, abolished polygamy and gave Tunisian women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world. The 'Personal Status Code' is, arguably, former president Habib Bourguiba's greatest single achievement. It was promulgated the year Tunisia gained independence from France, a year before the new constitution that abolished the monarchy. The rights of women were further consolidated last August by the national assembly. In the case of divorce, for instance, custody no longer goes automatically to the husband. Violence against women within the family is punishable, women can request a passport without going through their father or husband and the state helps divorced women to secure alimony. Since 1956 a policy of family planning has been in place. In the early 1960s free and confidential advice and prophylactics were made available to women. Combined with efforts to promote health and education, these policies reduced population growth from 3.2 to 1.9 per cent. The birth rate has declined from 45 to 25.4 per thousand, mortality from 15 to 6.1 per thousand. The illiteracy rate has been brought down from 87.7 per cent to 35 per cent, though the figure is higher among women in poorer country areas. Women are increasingly visible in teaching, medicine, architecture - in factories as workers, engineers, managers and owners. But Tunisian politics remains very much a man's world, despite some remarkable exceptions, including Fethia Baccouche and Hanoun Houda, who are deputies, two secretaries of state and a handful of senior civil servants such as Fayza Kefi, whose presides over the Union Nationale des Femmes de Tunisie. Most educated women have no lost love for the teachings of radical Islamic groups. Though al Nahda leaders have said they accept many of Mr Bourguiba's inheritance, women are mindful of the often violent track record of some supporters of the party, notably the throwing of acid in the faces of university students on the campus in Tunis. History teaches women that radical Islam has not been sympathetic to the idea of equality between sexes or to their presence in public places. The history of modern Tunisia suggests that the emancipation of women has been a key factor in explaining the country's social and economic progress since 1956. Economic progress has provided a means of emancipation which is far from negligible. When a new law in 1973 allowed joint ventures to be established for the first time in Tunisia with offshore tax status, a string of factories set up across the country, giving many young women their first taste of freedom. The simple act of walking to work a few hundred yards from home, away from the all powerful mother, broke many taboos. These women were not well paid but what little they earned allowed them to build up a dowry and gain a measure of freedom in choosing their husband. Once married, many were able to claim help from the state to buy a flat. Women have 25 per cent of all jobs in Tunisia, 35 per cent of jobs in industry, 22 per cent of jobs in the growing services sector, 40 per cent of jobs in agriculture, where they manage nearly 10 per cent of all farms. They are present everywhere, seldom veiled, and give Tunis and other major towns a strong Mediterranean feel. Last year's laws are ahead of the social mores of many Tunisians, yet they also reflect the fast changing attitudes affecting many sectors of society. About ten per cent of new companies are created by women, according to Aziza Dargouth, who runs the Cabinet de Prospective Sociale consulting agency. Hayet Laouni had her first job as secretary in a shipping company, 26 years ago, after training to become a primary school teacher. She now owns and runs Stumar, a company with turnover of Dollars 3m and is active in stevedoring, conveyancing and forwarding. She concedes it has not been easy for a woman to win acceptance in such a milieu, but as she moves around her office, cigarette in hand, firing orders, inquiring whether a particular container has arrived, the feeling Tunisia is undergoing a quiet revolution is overwhelming. Sarah Sahdallah owns and runs a porcelain factory, Ibtissem Kamoun has become one of Tunisia's largest producers of ice-cream, Rashida Rouissi exports fruit and vegetables. Scores of others are involved in textiles, ice cream and software. Such people would not quarrel with the policy of the Minister of Education, the highly respected Mohammed Charfi, who is having references in school text books that men are superior to women and adulterous women be stoned expurgated. The books of Hassan El Banna, the founder of modern fundamentalism, have been withdrawn from schools and public libraries. To western critics of such moves, many Tunisians point out that wealthy Saudis have, for the past two decades, been subsidising the printing and distributing of books offering the most conservative interpretation of Islam. Why should they be criticised for trying to promote more liberal views? Educated Tunisian women are well aware that some of their sisters support al Nahda. They agree with attempts to liberalise the economy and are convinced economic growth and a more broadly liberal society are the only serious ways to fight radical Islam. They are fearful of the possible spillover effects of events in neighbouring Algeria and Egypt.
19930616000000000	FT  16 JUN 93 / Unification changes the place of women in the new German home: Judy Dempsey finds women in the east feel they have paid a high price. 'UNIFICATION has not been kind to the women of eastern Germany,' says Ms Barbara Pfeiffer. In 1989, demonstrations in her home town of Leipzig spawned the people's revolution which brought down the Berlin Wall. Two years later Ms Pfeiffer lost her job when the chemicals factory where she had worked for 25 years closed down. Ms Pfeiffer, however, was sufficiently determined - and lucky, she says - to find a part-time job with a local construction company. Many women, who have borne the brunt of the surge in unemployment in eastern Germany since unification, have not been as fortunate. The official April unemployment total of 15.4 per cent hides the extent of the problem. Including those on job creation and training schemes and those who only have part-time jobs, about 30 per cent of the workforce are without full-time work. Two thirds of the unemployed are women. By contrast, East Germany guaranteed employment to more than 90 per cent of women, who accounted for 49 per cent of the labour force in 1989. 'The regime needed us,' explains Mrs Pfeiffer. 'It wanted to show there was equality under the communist system and it wanted us to work because many had fled before the Wall went up in 1961. We also needed the money, even though we were paid less than men,' she adds. Although the chemical plant where she worked turned out low-grade products, health standards were almost non-existent, and few employees were motivated by a management chosen for their loyalty to the communist party, 'it was a job,' says Ms Pfeiffer. The state's abundant provision of child-care made it easy for women to work. Until 1989, 80 per cent of children under three had a creche place, 95 per cent of pre-school over-threes attended kindergarten, more than 80 per cent of those aged six to ten received day-care after school, and 90 per cent of children attended cheap holiday camps. There are fears that the number of kindergartens will soon be reduced. 'Some people complained that the kids would be indoctrinated by the stupid communists,' says Ms Gaby Schwartz, a 37-year-old East Berliner. 'But the child-care system in western Germany appals me.' In the western states, 2.3m children compete for 600,000 partially subsidised state child-care places. Generally, however, many women employ nannies, or stay at home with the children. According to the federal ministry of women and youth, there is an overcapacity of kindergartens in eastern Germany. 'About 120 places exist for 100 children. The local communes will have to decide where to cut back.' It said east German women would in future have to pay for child care. Such a move would come on top of the scrapping of the former East Germany's generous child benefits. Unemployment - and the abolition of those benefits  -has slashed the birth rate from 2.5 children per family to 1.3, as low as in western Germany and one of the lowest in Europe. Unification has also impinged on the former East Germany's liberal abortion laws. 'In the old days, women in eastern Germany had one big freedom: abortion on demand. We could not understand why it was illegal for West Germans to have abortions,' says Helga Kokoschka, an unemployed 28-year-old mother of two children. Abortions were a common form of birth control, as in all of eastern Europe. Yet East German women saw abortion on demand not in ethical or moral terms, but as a political issue where women had complete freedom of choice. 'The state never dared interfere. This was our one area of freedom,' says Ms Pfeiffer. Thus the German constitutional court's ruling last month that abortion should remain illegal and only available under certain conditions has angered many east German women. 'The new unified state is imposing its will on us,' says Ms Pfeiffer. 'Our choice to work and control our own lives have disappeared.' East German women have had difficulties coming to terms with the multiple challenges of unification. Ms Eva Kolinsky, professor of German studies at Britain's Keele University, who is studying the position of women in Leipzig since 1989, says an entire generation of women have lost out as a result of unification. 'Those in mid-career, in their 30s or early 40s, will find it very difficult to re-enter the labour market,' she says. Ms Kolinsky is hopeful, however, for the next generation. 'More women are attending university. They see qualifications as the key to entering the market, when it picks up,' she says. 'But the price has been high. An entire generation has lost their social status in the new Germany.'
19930810000000000	FT  10 AUG 93 / Italian mamas turn new leaf. The Italian 'mama' - once a byword for big, bouncy, babies - has turned a new leaf, according to new population projections from the United Nations, writes Haig Simonian. The average fertility rate of Italian women is expected to drop to 1.3 per head in the period 1990-1995, according to the UN's World Population Report. That puts Italy ahead of the rest of the world in terms of declining family sizes. Even mothers in other industrialised European countries, such as Germany, where childbirth has been steadily falling, are still having more babies than the Italians.
19931025000000000	FT  25 OCT 93 / Survey of Germany (10): A story of births, deaths and marriages - The population is getting steadily older. The implications must be faced now. 'THE Germans are dying out'. Back in the early 1980s, the slogan was popularised by novelist Gunter Grass in the subtitle of his short story Kopfgeburten. Ten years on, the prospect of a shrinking and ageing population is moving closer to reality - and is beginning to become a central preoccupation for Germany's chattering classes. All over the land, people are marrying later, having fewer children and living longer, with the result that the number of Germans has already been declining for some time, to a current 72m out of a total population of 80m. Within another decade, however, it is certain that Germany's overall population will embark on a steepening decline. Suddenly, the experts fear, Germany will face a structural crisis with which it is ill- equipped to cope, as a shrinking working population bears the burden of an increasing number of old-age pensioners and as Germans themselves come to terms with the proportional increase of foreigners in their midst. The far-reaching consequences could affect every aspect of the way the country organises its political, economic, social and external affairs. 'It is like having termites in your house,' says Meinhard Miegel, co-author with Stefanie Wahl of a study of the demographic problem just published by the Bonn-based Institut fur Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft*. 'On the surface everything looks fine, but all of a sudden it collapses. This house looks sound at the moment and will continue to do so for some time to come. Then, in the early part of the 21st century we will face a crisis.' Mr Miegel uses colourful metaphors for effect. In a sense, the challenge confronting Germany is the same as that faced by most of the developed world. In all the leading industrial countries, pressures on the welfare state are growing as a result of falling birth rates, longer life- spans and increasing immigration. But Germany's problem is still more acute than that of its European neighbours and its American and Japanese trading partners, for several reasons. First, it is further ahead in the population cycle: the number of Germans started to decline 20 years ago, while most European nations were still in a phase of gentle growth; as a result, Germany already has a proportionately higher elderly population. Second, although the problem has been disguised up to now by waves of immigration in the 1960s and late 1980s, that in itself has created difficulties thanks to Germany's failure to integrate most of the new inhabitants into its society. Such difficulties can only proliferate in the years ahead. Third, Germany's history in this century has seen to it that population decline in the early decades of the next will seem especially acute. In the Nazi years, there was a sudden surge in the birth rate as Germans were told it was part of their patriotic duty to procreate. The offspring of that baby boom are now getting on in years and in another decade will be starting to die off in significant numbers. The numbers can be stated with almost predestined precision, for they reflect a secular trend of falling birth rates and diminishing family sizes dating back (with the notable exception of the Hitler years) to the early 1900s (see chart). By the early 1970s, the generation of German children was less numerous than that of their grandparents and the number of deaths overtook that of births. Since then the margin has widened: at the turn of the century, Mr Miegel estimates, deaths will exceed births by 300,000 a year, rising by 2030 to a staggering 600,000 - equivalent to eliminating the city of Frankfurt every year. Between now and 2030, the number of Germans will decline by about 15m  -not far short of the current population of eastern Germany. This is not a trend, say Mr Miegel and Ms Wahl, that can be reversed through some governmental magic wand. The individualistic Germans of today are not going to be persuaded to breed either through diktat or economic incentive. Even in eastern Germany - whose apparently more youthful population results mainly from a higher death rate under communism thanks to poor health care and difficult working and living conditions - the birth rate has plunged since unification. Nor does increasing immigration represent much of a solution. True, the arrival over the last three years of some 3.2m new inhabitants - including asylum seekers and 1.4m 'Aussiedler' of German origin, mainly from the former Soviet empire - has served to compensate for the declining number of Germans. But that is unlikely to continue. Germany has now tightened up its asylum laws, and in any case is having severe difficulties integrating the newcomers, many of whom end up on the unemployment registers or outside the formal labour market. Simply to make up for the continuing fall in the German population, the country would have to take 1.5m immigrants in the 1990s and 13.8m more between 2001 and 2030. It is inconceivable that German society, or the country's political system, could handle an influx of this magnitude. One consequence of all this is an already perceptible 'greying' of Germany. Today, one fifth of the population is 20 or younger and another fifth 60 or over. In 2000, the under-20s will still represent a fifth but the over-60s will have reached a quarter of the total; by 2030, only 16 per cent will be under 20, 46 per cent will be between 20 and 60, and 38 per cent over 60. In short, within less than 30 years, a diminishing population of working age will have to carry a roughly equal, and rising, number of people either too young or too old to work  - at least under current laws. The effects will be felt in every corner of society. School and university rolls will fall; the shrinkage in the population between 20 and 60 will dictate changes in government policies towards the labour market; the country's infrastructure needs will alter. Above all, the shifting shape of the population will entail significant structural changes in the economy, and in particular in the role of the state. The most obvious burden will be on Germany's social welfare system. A rising number of over-60s - and indeed, thanks to medical science, of over-80s - spells increased spending on health care, pensions and old people's care. Nobody seriously believes that Germany will be able to afford this without a substantial restructuring of the welfare state, involving some increase in private-sector provision. The economy will undergo other - subtler but no less significant - changes. Property values could fall as elderly people sell off assets to fund their service needs; the manufacturing sector will diminish in relation to services; capital for infrastructure projects will tend be raised on a shorter term basis. Mr Miegel and Ms Wahl even suggest that Germany's population shrinkage will over time serve to reduce its economic might: 'In two generations, Germany might under realistic assumptions only be a medium-sized European power. Its population may not be, as today, the second largest in Europe after Russia's, but perhaps the fourth or fifth largest after Russia, Ukraine and possibly also France and Britain ..And its population will be among the oldest in Europe and the world.' What, then, is to be done? There are no easy answers. Ideally, says the study, Germany would - while coming to terms with a some measure of shrinkage in its population - seek to offset it by adopting sensible policies on immigration and on the integration of foreigners, for example by allowing a greater number to become German citizens. Unfortunately, nothing like this is remotely on the cards. The word Bevolkerungspolitik (population policy) acquired an ugly ring in German politics as a result of its abuse during the Nazi period, and the current generation of politicians tends to regard these issues as too hot to handle. Nevertheless, they will not simply go away. If Germany does not start sensibly to debate the structural questions raised by its shrinking population soon, then it will find itself grappling with them in a much more polarised political climate 10 years from now. *Das Ende des Individualismus: die Kultur des Westens zerstort sich selbst; Verlag Bonn Aktuell; September 1993
19940215000000000	FT  15 FEB 94 / Personal View: Positive aspects of Ireland's economy. European Union statistics shows that there is one member state whose growth over the past five years is spectacularly ahead of all the others - almost three times faster than the rest of the EU - and which has by far the best EU record in relation to the expansion of manufacturing employment. It also has the lowest rate of inflation during this period. Moreover, it has for some years had the lowest level of public borrowing and by far the fastest export growth and biggest external payments surplus in the European Union. This state is also unusual in that the increase in the purchasing power of its average wage since 1988 has been matched only by one other EU country - Portugal. Other striking features are that it has the lowest death rate in the world for mothers and for children under five, the highest level of food consumption and the second-highest rate of home ownership. Its rate of female participation in parliament and government is a third higher than in Britain and the EU respectively. The state in question is Ireland. Of course, this is not the whole story. There are two other aspects of the Irish state which are equally notable and less positive: its average level of living standards, measured in terms of its disposable income per head of population, is 22 per cent below that of the EU as a whole, and its unemployment rate is higher than in any other EU country except Spain. Both of these features are, however, largely time-lagged consequences of a very high birth rate, which as recently as the late 1970s was as much as four-fifths higher than in many other European countries. However, this exceptionally high rate is now a thing of the past. For, despite the increase of more than half in the number of young people in its population during the past two decades, a virtual halving of the fertility rate has reduced the Irish birth rate by more than a third. This was brought about by the almost universal adoption of contraceptive practices, in disregard of the attitude of the Roman Catholic authorities. It is quite possible that within a few years the rate will have fallen to the kind of very low level that prevails in countries in southern Europe. Why has the Irish birth rate been such a crucial factor influencing ultimately a country's living standards as internationally measured? For the simple reason that a country whose birth rate has been very high in the recent past is bound to have a much higher ratio of dependants to workers: not only children and students, but also, eventually, unemployed. This is because there is a limit to any modern industrial state's ability to absorb very large flows of young people emerging annually from the education system. This is why the Irish state's dependency ratio is 215 per 100 workers as against about 130 dependents per 100 workers in the UK and 157 per 100 in the EU as a whole. Vis a vis the UK, this factor helps explain the Irish state's lower level of output per capita. For after a five-year period in which Irish gross domestic product has risen by 26 per cent, against a net 2 per cent in the UK, the level of disposable income per worker in Ireland measured at purchasing power parities is now the same as that of Britain and higher than that of Scandinavia. The level of Irish unemployment is also largely a function of the past high birth rate. Because Ireland's population was a fifth smaller up to 30 years ago, the number of annual retirements is currently relatively low. At the same time, the high birth rate up to the 1980s has been yielding - and will continue to yield until after 1998 - a high rate of entry into the Irish labour force. The result: a need for a net annual increase of more than 3 per cent in jobs - whereas in the EU as a whole the rate has been only a fifth of 1 per cent. With annual births down from 74,000 in 1980 to fewer than 52,000 in 1989, and now dropping below 50,000, it is clear that this problem will have largely solved itself within about 15 years. Meanwhile, the short-term growth prospects of the Irish economy are probably better even than forecast by the European Commission. There are now marked signs of a recovery in consumer demand, which will generate increased employment later this year. This is the background to the recent Irish budget, which should have a moderately stimulating effect on the economy, mainly through income tax reliefs. The author is the former taoiseach (prime minister) of Ireland  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- CHANGES 1988-1993 %  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                      Ireland           UK  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- GDP                                    +26           +2 GDP per worker                         +23           +6.5 Total employment manufacturing          +3           -4.5 Employment                              +5          -18 Real wages                             +16           +9 Consumer prices                        +13          +30.5 Investment                             +11.5         -7.5 Personal consumption                   +16           +3.5  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Percentage of GDP 1993  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Public borrowing                         2.5          7.2 Current external balance                +6.5         -2.3  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
19940422000000000	FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (17): A certain hubbub around the ministry - Population trends. Egypt is to host the third United Nations conference for population and development next September. Seven thousand experts will be there - and Egypt will be flaunting its achievement of reducing growth in the birth rate, among its 61m people squeezed into only 4.5 per cent of the country's area, from 3 per cent a year in 1985 to a 1993 rate of 2.3 per cent. A certain hubbub has been generated around the new Population Ministry, created after President Hosni Mubarak's cabinet reshuffle last October. Egypt has made impressive gains in population control over the past 10 years, largely as a result of an effective advertising campaign. The crude birth rate has dropped from 39.9 per 1,000 in 1985 to 29.2 per 1,000 in 1993, while the crude death rate has dropped from 9.4 per thousand in 1985 to 7.4 in 1993. The fertility rate has fallen to an average 3.9 births per woman, from 5.3 births in 1980. About 47 per cent of couples use some form of contraception  -almost twice the figure recorded six years ago. Nearly 30 per cent of these use intra-uterine devices (IUDs) - mostly supplied by the US Agency for International Development. Thirteen per cent use the pill and the remainder use traditional methods and condoms  - the least popular form of control. (Unhappily, several years ago a consignment of condoms donated by the US found its way into the market place where they were sold as children's balloons.) However, these gains are now levelling out. The next phase, during which the birth rate should stay the same and the death rate should drop, is going to be more difficult. Dr Maher Mahram, the population minister, uses the analogy of going on a diet to lose weight. 'If you want to lose weight, it is easy at first. Once you have lost it, keeping the weight off is the difficult part.' Meanwhile some critics suggest that the hubbub might be kalam fadi - empty talk. 'President Mubarak mentions population in every speech he makes but there is no clear commitment from the cabinet,' says Dr Barbara Ibrahim, senior representative for the west and north Africa regions at the International Population Council. 'More than half of them do not think that population is a problem. They are products of the socialist era and see development as the best contraception. But unless they limit family size, there won't be any development,' she says. The issue has been 'ghetto-ised' she claims, with the creation of the ministry. The key to further progress lies with improvements in living standards and education - over which the ministry has no control. The World Bank estimates that 20-25 per cent of the population lives on a total monthly income of less than Dollars 35. Almost one in four children under the age of five is malnourished. 36 per cent of the male population is illiterate; 48 per cent of females are illiterate. Furthermore, attitudes among men - particularly in the rural areas of Upper Egypt - need to be altered. The latest Egypt Demographic and Health Survey shows that 40 per cent of men feel they should have the primary role in decisions about childbearing (a figure disputed by Mr Robin Lee at the Marie Stopes clinic in Shoubra, a Cairo suburb, who claims that it is more like 80 per cent). Only 27 per cent of couples in Upper Egypt use contraception and the average number of children per household is six. In rural areas, children are still regarded as cheap labour; it is no surprise that the highest fertility rates are found where socio-economic indicators are lowest. These issues are deeply entrenched. A more recent one is the rise in Islamic fundamentalism. Dr Mahran denies that this has become a serious problem. The Grand Mufti, Egypt's highest authority on Islamic jurisprudence, has declared that family planning does not contradict the teachings of Allah. But some imams have been preaching against it in the local mosques. According to Dr Ibrahim, studies show that some doctors serving in government clinics are being recruited by Islamic militants who see family planning as a western plot. The physicians are making no more than a general protest against the government in denying contraceptive advice, she says, rather than exercising some deeply held religious conviction. 'It has just become a convenient whipping boy.' More subtly, women surveyed at the Marie Stopes clinic were found to be reacting to advertising in a manner opposite from that intended. When shown two scenes, one with a woman relaxing and painting her finger nails, the other a mother of five rushing about doing the housework, they saw the harried housewife as their preferred role model. For these attitudes to change, the ministry needs a much larger budget than it has; Dr Mahran complains about his lack of resources. Perhaps September's conference will give the issue sufficient prestige to ensure renewed political will to succeed.
19940511000000000	FT  11 MAY 94 / Survey of Spain (6): Hard choices on welfare - Whether the public sector can provide all the solutions. Spain is by no means alone in the European Union in having an increasing deficit problem, but its budget shortfall is bigger and has grown more quickly than elsewhere, and it looks a lot tougher to control. At the root of Spain's problem are the accelerated creation, within a short time, of what western society understands as cradle-to-grave welfare and the onset of the most severe economic recession in living memory, just when social spending had reached record levels. Between 1982 when it came to power and last year when it won a fourth election, the governing Socialist party spent lavishly on education, health care, pensions and unemployment benefits. Idealistic (and certainly youthful in the early 1980s), Mr Felipe Gonzalez's cabinet set out to redress what it perceived to be glaring social injustices. Milestones in the welfare drive have included: Raising the school leaving age to 16; doubling the university student population; a big schools building programme and greatly increased budgets for teacher training; The extension of the health service and of pension rights to the entire population - regardless of whether individuals had or had not paid social security contributions; The creation - virtually from scratch - of a nationwide unemployment benefit scheme and enormous injections of cash to provide dole money for the lengthening queues of job seekers. Mr Gonzalez's governments added a social democratic spin on what was already a drift towards greater welfare allocations in the aftermath of General Franco's death and the restoration of democracy in Spain. All in all, social spending has risen from 27 per cent of GDP in 1977, when Spain staged its first free elections, to its present level of more than 50 per cent. The government's welfare commitments hit trouble last year, when GDP shrank by 1.1 per cent and the rising cost of social spending ran well ahead of what proved to be sharply diminishing revenues. A planned budget deficit of 3.5 per cent of GDP for 1993 was revised upwards to 4.5 per cent and ended up as a 7.2 per cent shortfall. For Mr Pedro Solbes, finance minister, the time for a sombre reckoning as to where and how can costs be contained and, if possible, reduced, is overdue. It is a reflection of the magnitude of his task that Mr Solbes has all but abandoned the EU's economic and monetary union convergence target of a 3 per cent deficit in 1997 and has circulated draft documents to the cabinet suggesting that the deficit will stand at 'about' 4 per cent by that date. To bring the deficit down at all, let alone by three points, the government will have to jettison much of the social democrat culture it has practised in the past. The Socialist party recognised as much last March, when it held its first national congress in more than three years. It adopted a key resolution entitled Towards a New Social Democrat Model, which asserted that free markets and competition were no longer 'obstacles to the construction of socialism' but 'simple data of existing reality'. The resolution said the party had to 'abandon a culture' which was 'excessively weighted' towards the state and which had 'the public sector providing solutions for everything'. The choices facing the government, as it turns such principles into policies, are difficult - and could have unpleasant consequences. University fees, for example, will have to be substantially increased, which may bring students out in force on to the streets. (At present 85 per cent of the cost of a student's education is picked up by the tax payer.) Much more controversial is the need for a radical overhaul of the state pension scheme. The present system, which features pensions based on 100 per cent of average earnings during the eight years previous to retirement, is more generous than in richer EU countries, where a lifetime's average earnings is often the norm. More importantly, it is unsustainable. Spending on pensions represented Pta1,596bn (Dollars 11.4bn) in 1982 and grew to 9.8 per cent of GDP - Pta5,758bn - in 1992. There are now 5.3m Spaniards over the age of 65 - more than double the total 30 years earlier. In 1993 the average age of new pensioners was 63, two years below the official retirement age, reflecting the increasing number of employees who had opted for voluntary redundancies and early retirement. Mr Joaquin Almunia, a former cabinet minister who now chairs a parliamentary committee examining the future of the social security system, argues that the mandatory retirement age of 65 for civil servants should be raised to 70; that incentives should be introduced for those who choose to continue working after the age of 65; and that pensions themselves should be based on a longer earnings time scale. Unless such reforms are introduced, Spain will not be able to pay pensions in 2025-2020 - the decade when the domestic baby boomers - there was a high Spanish birth rate between 1955-1965 - are due to retire. The problem is made more difficult now by the collapse of Spain's birth rate. The fertility rate - the average number of children per woman of child-bearing age - has dropped from 2.6 per cent in 1977 and 2.2 per cent in 1980 to 1.2 per cent, one of the lowest in Europe. Mr Almunia suggests that the shrinking youth population means that Spain will have to import labour in the coming years. Spanish society will thus be facing for the first time the problems which can accompany a large immigrant population. Nonetheless, the biggest immediate problems - insofar as they are most directly responsible for the growing deficit - are the health care and, in particular, the unemployment welfare systems. Current spending on unemployment represents 4 per cent of GDP - one of the highest ratios in the EU. Proportionally, Spain has by far the highest number of registered unemployed. The government is now reducing the number of pharmaceutical products available free under the health care system and is negotiating lower costs with drug producers. On the unemployment front, it is increasing its inspections of unemployment fraud. But tougher decisions are required. These range from deregulating the stranglehold which pharmacies exert over the health care sector, to bringing the spendthrift employment institute, the INEM, under direct control of the treasury. Along with thorough-going reforms, two things have to happen before Spain's public finances pick themselves up off the floor. First, the economy must recover - and recover strongly. Second, the limitations of a welfare system must be properly understood by politicians and by voters.
19940802000000000	FT  02 AUG 94 / Italian birth rate shrinks. Italians risk becoming a vanishing race if current demographic trends continue. In 1993 Italy registered a 'birth deficit', with deaths outnumbering the newly born for the first time this century outside the first world war. According to Istat, the national statistics institute, the number of births fell to 538,168 - the lowest level since the unification of Italy. In contrast, the number of deaths rose to 543,433. Compared to 1992, the birth rate fell from 9.9 to 9.4 per 1,000. If the present trend continues, one recent research paper suggests Italy's population could fall from 57m to 12m by the year 2100. However, the south continues to be prolific and its baby 'surplus' almost compensates for the 'deficit' in the centre and north. Increased wealth is the main explanation for the decline. But unlike northern European countries, Italy does not possess an immigrant population with a high birth rate.
19940812000000000	FT  12 AUG 94 / Children neither seen nor heard: A steep fall in the birth rate means demographic worries for east Germany. The British author, PD James, recently wrote a novel called The Children of Men. It is set in England in 2021 and describes how infertility has spread like a plague. The human race faces extinction as scientists try to reverse the trend. At the end of the book, a woman gives birth, but whether this is enough to save the human race is left open. German demographers and doctors could identity with this work of fiction: five years since the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the birth rate in east Germany continues to plummet. Mr Horst Halle, head of the maternity department at the Charite, east Berlin's largest hospital, first noticed the trend in early 1990. 'You just had to look at the statistics,' he explained. 'Before 1989, there were about 16,000 babies born each year in east Berlin. Today, that figure has slumped to 6,800, a decline of about 60 per cent. 'In the Charite itself, we used to record about 2,200 births a year. Today, we have fewer than 1,800, and we are doing better than most maternity hospitals in east Berlin.' Such an unprecedented fall in the birth rate would have shocked the former communist regime in East Germany. It prided itself on its wide range of social services aimed at providing women with excellent childcare facilities to encourage them to have children. Then, day-care centres were free. Women could take a year's paid maternity leave and return to a guaranteed job, or take off three years with generous state support and still have the same job to go back to. Indeed, more than 90 per cent of the female working population were employed, compared with 49 per cent in west Germany. By the age of 21, east German women started having children, unlike their west German counterparts, who generally started a family in their mid-to-late 20s. Despite these incentives, however, the birth rate in east Germany was relatively low compared with most other east European countries under the communists. Mr Jurgen Dorbritz, a demographer at the Federal Statistics Office, says: 'What we are now seeing in eastern Germany is a birth rate which is falling from a low base. That is the worrying aspect. That's what makes the statistics so extraordinary.' In 1989, there were 198,922 live births in east Germany, the equivalent of 12 births per 1,000, or about 1.6 children per family. This was the same as in west Germany. By 1993, the number of east German births had fallen to 79,926 - or about 60 per cent of the 1989 rate - the equivalent of 0.8 children per family, or only half the west German level. 'We just don't know how long this trend will continue. One thing is certain. There will be very few children born between the years 2015 and 2020 because of the lack of women of child-bearing age. Can you imagine how difficult it is going to be to pay for the number of old people in our country?' said Mr Dorbritz. According to the latest statistics from the German Association for Pension Insurance, the number of people under the age of 20 in east Germany will fall from 3.84m in 1993 to 2.6m in 2020; the number of people aged between 20 and 60 will fall from 8.7m to 7.6m; and those over 60 will rise from 3m to 4.13m. The percentage of pensioners per 100 contributors to the state pension insurance system will rise from 26 per cent in 1993 to more than 50 per cent by 2020. Mr Halle, who has worked in the Charite for 28 years, believes there are several reasons why east German women are remaining childless. 'Demographers tend to ignore the fact that we had been expecting a sharp fall in the birth rate in the year 1995, regardless of unification. This is because the east German abortion law of 1972 made abortion available on demand. We knew we were not going to have many child-bearing women in the mid-1990s,' he explained. In 1972, the birth rate fell to about 6 per 1,000, climbing back to about 12 births per 1,000. Today it is fewer than 5.1. But Mr Halle also believes that the process of German unification itself has had a profound social effect on east German women. 'A young east German woman knows that if she becomes pregnant, the chances she will find a job are now far less, especially given the high level of unemployment,' he said. East German women have borne the brunt of unemployment, which is officially 16 per cent of the working population, excluding those on short-time work, early retirement schemes, or job creation programmes. By the end of the first quarter of this year, more than 790,000 east German women had lost their jobs, representing a female unemployment rate of 23 per cent. In west Germany, 1.1m women, or 9.3 per cent, are out of work. 'East German women today have freedom of choice, but they have lost their status in society,' said Mr Dorbritz. The other pressure arising from unification is that many east German women have had to seek new qualifications, retrain, or change jobs more often, unlike the former days when a job was for life. 'There is no more security. The widespread sense of uncertainty has played a major role in the decline of the birth rate,' said Mr Dorbritz. The freedom to travel has played its part in the decline of the birth rate as well: young east German women have an unprecedented chance to go abroad before they settle and start a family. 'There was hardly anything else to do before 1989,' said Mr Dorbritz. 'East German society was geared towards encouraging young women to procreate. All those social planks of free kindergartens, both parents in a job, heavily subsidised or free children's clothes and shoes, have now disappeared.' Greater mobility and open borders have led to a sharp rise in migration from east Germany to west Germany. More than 1.2m from a population of 17m east Germans went to live in west Germany between late 1989 and early 1991. 'Many of these people were young and skilled,' said Mr Nicholas Eberstadt, a demographer at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research. 'Of the overall drop in the birth rate, roughly one-ninth can be attributed to the sheer decline of east Germany's population during those two years.' Staff at the Charite hospital know that, unless the birth rate increases, the obstetricians, doctors and nurses could be without a job. 'We have 2,000 beds here,' said Mr Halle. 'Before unification, we were dealing with more than 2,200 women a year. If we cannot account for all the beds, we will be under pressure to make savings. That means cutting jobs.' But his main concern is the kind of society which will evolve in east Germany in the next century. 'The prognosis is very bad,' said Mr Halle. 'I do not know how we are going to fend for the elderly. Who is going to pay for them?' One answer might be to allow immigrants into the country under a quota system to replenish the population - a solution advanced by some liberals. One thing is clear. Mr Eberstadt believes that, if the present trends in east Germany continue, it will be virtually impossible for what he calls 'generational replacement' to occur. 'For generational replacement, eastern Germany's women of child-bearing age today would have to give birth to an average of about 2.07 infants over the course of their lives. They are now having 0.8 children, less than one birth per woman per lifetime. This is not enough for a net population replacement.'
19940818000000000	FT  18 AUG 94 / Fertility rates are down but not enough. The UN's population report tells of a dramatic drop in fertility rates in the past 40 years, even in some of the world's poorest countries, Bronwen Maddox reports. In Asia and Latin America the fertility rate has nearly halved from 5.9 to about 3 children per woman in that period, although Africa (including northern African states) has showed a smaller decline from 6.6 to 5.8. Even in developed countries, rates have fallen from 2.8 to 1.7 over that period. These patterns have forced demographers to modify the old assumption of a link between low birth rates and economic wealth in favour of a more complex picture. Some countries, such as Bangladesh, have achieved steep falls in fertility rates despite relative lack of economic growth. Others, notably Pakistan and Middle Eastern countries, continue to have large average family sizes despite relatively high levels of economic prosperity. The UNFPA draws a close connection between low fertility rates and the availability of contraception, even where gross domestic product per head has not risen greatly. It attributes roughly half of the fall in worldwide fertility rates to improved distribution of contraceptives. The other half, it says, is due simply to the determination of parents to have fewer children, even when contraception is not available. Even the poorest families, UNFPA officials say, work out that they can spend more on each child if they have fewer children. Demographers have long agreed that improving women's education plays an important part in reducing family sizes. But the UN report suggests that newer pressures are also providing powerful motivation. When workers move to towns from the countryside they tend to delay having children and to have fewer. Anecdotal evidence from west African countries also suggests that looming land shortages are curbing the size of rural families. These new factors may be helping to push down fertility rates even in Africa and central America, the regions which have persistently had the highest rates, Mr Alex Marshall of UNFPA suggests. Since the first half of the 1980s, Tanzania has seen fertility rates drop from 6.7 to 5.9 children per woman, Namibia from 5.8 to 5.3 and South Africa from 4.8 to 4.1.
19940901000000000	FT  01 SEP 94 / Birth-rate successes moderate Iran's stance: A look at attempts to rein in alarming fertility rates as population hits 60m. The Iranian government's opposition to next week's United Nations population conference is not so great that it will join Saudi Arabia and Sudan in boycotting it. Iran is sending a delegation which it hopes will 'adapt the final document to incorporate religious ethics'. Criticism of the Cairo conference centres on the pragmatic approach taken towards issues such as extramarital and adolescent sex. Mr Ali Reza Marandi, Iran's health minister, said earlier this week, that the draft document 'seemed to have disregarded the religious views of the Islamic world and formulated the text with a sense of sexual liberty'. Iran's own religious ethics underwent revision toward population control in 1988, when the government recognised the severity of the country's high population growth rate. The average population growth rate of 3.9 per cent a year in the early 1980s was among the highest in the world. The Islamic government, which took over after the 1979 revolution, laid greater emphasis than before on early marriage and the woman's role as wife and mother and saw no reason to encourage birth control. It welcomed the growth in population, seeing it in terms of increased resources to build the country into an Islamic model. By the mid-80s, however, concerns about the economy led to fears that the high population growth was a threat rather than an aid to economic development. Iran's population grew from just over 37m at the beginning of the revolution in 1979 to 57m by 1986, an increase attributed to the lack of a family planning programme combined with improved health care since the 1960s. Today, Iran's population is believed to stand at more than 60m. Implementation of a family planning programme in 1988 has witnessed a drop in the annual average growth rate from the 3.9 per cent peak to 2.3 per cent last year and down further to 1.8 per cent in July, according to government figures. Demographic experts, while acknowledging that Iran has been successful in controlling its population growth, are sceptical of these figures. They argue that such a rapid population decrease is impossible in such a short period of time and cite the need for strengthened data collection and statistical analysis. The most reliable figures are those of the country's census, taken every five years. This showed an annual average growth rate of 2.9 per cent in 1991, well above the current 2 per cent growth rate for developing countries. Subsequent figures have been based on less reliable samples. Mr Shu Yun Xu, Iran country director at the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), says that despite the controversial figures, Iran's family planning programme has been 'a great achievement', partly because of the strength of the government's commitment. 'It has been supportive of all contraceptive methods, including male sterilisation. Only abortion is not allowed.' In June, the UNFPA approved a Dollars 10m five-year country programme for Iran and part of the funds are allocated to improving Iran's demographic data collection. The main thrust of the government's population control programme has been based on an increased supply of contraceptives, the training of rural midwives and counselling in family planning techniques. The Ministry of Health, which established a Fertility Regulation Council in 1988 to implement the programme, reports a decline in total fertility from 6.4 children per woman in 1988 to 4.25 in 1993. Increase use of contraceptives has been partly fuelled by the lack of family planning services for almost a decade. An active family planning programme was launched under the Shah's regime, so the implementation of the current programme has been relatively easy given the public's existing awareness. Another reason for the success of the family planning programme has been a relatively good health infrastructure which, according to UNFPA reaches 60 per cent of those living in the countryside and 90 per cent of the majority urban population. Mr Xu said: 'The primary healthcare network is very good especially in rural areas and the infrastructure is much better than for many Asian countries.' A women's health volunteer programme in the poor suburbs of southern Tehran has so far produced good results and is to be extended. Under the programme, women volunteers act as family planning counsellors in areas which are not served by the primary healthcare network. Iran has a relatively high literacy rate of 74 per cent and girls' enrolment in primary school is nearly as high as that of boys. The spread of education and literacy has increased a widespread desire for smaller families. Despite the success of the programme to date, the UNFPA says the tasks ahead are still 'formidable'. A relatively large number of Iranians, born in the baby-boom of 1976-1986 will be of child-bearing age from 1996 onwards, so fertility rates will increase. Since 65 per cent of the population is under the age of 25, there is a need for even more emphasis to be placed on education.  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- POPULATION IN IRAN  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Population:                           1994                     63.2m                                       2025                    144.6m Average growth 1990-95                                          2.7% Urban population 1992                                            58% Fertility rate/woman   1990-95                                   6.0 Adult literacy 1990:                  male                       65%                                       female                     43% Family planning users   1975-93                                  65% GNP per capita 1991                                    Dollars 2,170 Share of central govt spending 1991 on:          education                                             20.9%             health                                              7.9%  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Source: UNFPA  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
19940905000000000	FT  05 SEP 94 / Youthful Brazil faces problems of old age: Life expectancy is rising while the birth rate is continuing to fall. Brazil looks set to enter the next century with 40m people 'missing'. According to projections made in the 1970s, its population would reach 212m by the year 2000. But according to latest predictions, the total will be far less, probably 172m. The reasons for the sharp slowdown in population growth are also seen in other Latin American countries. They include a drastic fall in female fertility rates, mainly due to increased use of contraceptives and rapid urbanisation. The consequences, which include an ageing society and serious strains on social and employment needs, have not yet been addressed. 'It is the population above 65 which will grow the most in the next decades. Brazil will have to live with this phenomenon, which is well known in developed countries, without having overcome typical problems related to under-development,' says demographics professor Jose de Carvalho. Brazil's population change started in the 1940s. Improved medical and basic services led to falling mortality rates. Fertility rates remained high until the end of the 1960s, leading to rapid population growth and a society with more than half its members under 20 years old. It also encouraged a belief, still held by many today, that Brazil was blessed with an eternally young and fast growing population. At the first international population conference in Bucharest in 1974, Brazil's population was 100m and expected to double rapidly. But the female fertility rate - the average number of births per child-bearing woman - began a startling fall from 5.8 in 1970 to 4.3 in 1975 and 3.6 by 1984. In a recent study of Sao Paulo state, Brazil's richest, the fertility rate was 2.3, in line with some developed countries. The fall was partly due to rising education and urbanisation, as families moved from agricultural to industrial jobs. But the main reason was increased access to, and demand for, contraception. By 1986, 66 per cent of women of child-bearing age said they were using some form of contraceptive. Of these, about 40 per cent had been sterilised and a further 40 per cent used the pill. By 1990, contraception use had risen to 69 per cent. These rates are high, considering Brazil is the world's largest Catholic country with a still conservative church hierachy. Abortion is illegal unless the woman has been raped or is in medical danger. Officially, the church promotes the Billings method, which teaches couples to avoid sex during ovulation. But very few couples obey, suggesting the church is, unofficially, more liberal than it appears or losing its sway. Padre Antonio Carlos Frizzo, whose parish is in the poor suburbs of Sao Paulo, says couples must choose. 'If a couple asked advice on sterilisation, which is rare, I would take into account their economic situation and number of children, the love between them and whether another method is possible. 'But the couple must decide, and that's something we should not and cannot try to stop. And their decision has to be supported, too. This might be criticised in the Vatican, but we are dealing with people in real situations,' he says. The increasing demand for sterilisation has a startling side-effect - it has helped make Brazil the world leader for caesarian births. These account for roughly one in three deliveries, about twice the rate for England and Wales. The reasons are complex. Some women think caesarian section a 'modern' way to give birth, a view hospitals encourage, while others fear the pain involved in vaginal deliveries. Another reason is that when giving birth by caesarian, a woman can request to be sterilised at the same time and the government pays. Outside pregnancy, women have to pay to be sterilised, usually at semi-legal clinics. The declining birth rate will transform Brazil over the coming decades. Population growth, which in the 1970s was 2.4 per cent, has fallen to 1.9 per cent and is still declining. Today, 35 per cent of the country's 157m population is under 15 years old. By 2020, the percentage will have fallen to 24 per cent. By about 2040, with a rapidly aging society, the population will reach about 220m and stabilise or even fall. This prompts the church and other anti-abortion groups to argue that population control is now obsolete in Brazil, especially given the country's undeveloped agricultural land. A more stable population will also allow better government planning. In the past, rapid population growth in cities, for example, has prevented governments developing long-term urban plans. But the changes will also provide some sobering challenges. The number of people of working age is set to grow 2.4 per cent a year for the next decade, adding to pressures on the economy to create jobs. The social security system, established when the average age at death was 45, must be reformed to cope with life expectancies of 64 and 69 for men and women respectively. The country's under-funded public health system must emphasise preventative medicine if it is to cope with the increasing demands of an ageing population. Finally, the growing number of elderly from smaller families will need extra services. Unfortunately, Brazil does not seem greatly aware of these challenges. Because of the government's economic problems, the 1990 census was postponed to 1991. After further spending cuts, only basic findings are available.
19940906000000000	FT  06 SEP 94 / Emancipation helps Tunisia to steady growth: A 'Personal Status Code' has given women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world. Amid all the controversy surrounding the United Nations Population Conference in Cairo, the example of one small Moslem country, Tunisia, traditionally tolerant and open to western influence, suggests the emancipation of women has been a significant factor in reducing population growth from 3.2 per cent a generation ago to 1.9 today. Vastly improved standards of education and health care are other ingredients which explain Tunisia's steady economic performance in recent years. Real growth has averaged 5 per cent a year since 1989 and inflation is running at a little over 3 per cent. Over two-thirds of all households own or are buying a house or apartment. The successful implementation of a structural readjustment programme has, since 1987, won plaudits from both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and contributed to the resilience of the economy in overcoming the impact of the Gulf War and, last winter, a severe drought. The tourist sector is attracting 2.5m Europeans this year and contributing an estimated Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 800m) to exports of goods and services. Most striking is the coherence of the 'Personal Status Code', promulgated by former president Habib Bourguiba in 1956, the year Tunisia gained independence from France, which abolished polygamy and established all the laws governing family planning, divorce and the education of women which have given Tunisian women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world. In 1963, free prescriptions of the pill and free confidential advice on contraception were made available to women, 10 years before France. The programme spread to even the smallest village. The birth rate has declined from 45 to 24.4 per 1,000, mortality from 15 to 6.1 per 1,000. Illiteracy has been cut from 87.7 to 35 per cent, though the figure is higher among women in poorer areas. Women are increasingly visible in teaching, medicine and architecture, in factories as workers, engineers and owners. The world of politics remains very much a man's world, although the professional skills and sureness of touch which Mrs Neziha Mezhoud, minister in charge of family issues, and a growing number of other highly-articulate women bring to their jobs, suggests it is only a matter of years before senior cabinet posts will go to women. Though leaders of the opposition Islamic al Nahda (Renaissance) party have said they would accept many of Mr Bourguiba's policies, women are mindful of the often violent record of some supporters of the party, notably the throwing of acid in the faces of university students on the campus in Tunis. Many Tunisian women are convinced radical Islam is not sympathetic to the idea of equality between the sexes or to their presence in public places. The laws on divorce and alimony are remarkably close to their European counterparts. Indirectly, they allow women a far greater share of inheritance than the Koran allows. To bolster these moves, the books of people such as Hassan el Banna, the founder of modern fundamentalism, have been withdrawn from schools and public libraries, and references to the inferior status of women erased from all school books. Women today have 25 per cent of all jobs in Tunisia, 35 per cent of all jobs in industry, 22 per cent in the growing services sector and 40 per cent in agriculture, where they manage 10 per cent of all farms. Ten per cent of all new companies are created by women. The cycle of emancipation, education, public presence, most notably in the workplace, success in the professions and industry helps to explain why a country of such slender natural resources has progressed so much faster, not least economically, than many of its peers in the Middle East and Africa.
