10000000000000000	unemployment in France in the 1990s Describe the unemployment situation in France in the 1990s  Discuss social consequences of this situation  Identify possible causes of the unemployment situation and policies proposed to support jobless people and to reduce unemployment.
19960628000000000	Demonstration Staged in Lyon Against G-7 Policies. LYON, France, June 27 (Xinhua) -- Several hundred people took part in the demonstration here today against the policies of the world's most developed nations. The protest took place when leaders of the group of seven (G-7) industrialized nations gathered in this southeastern French city for a three-day summit meeting. The peaceful demonstration, organized by a group of 53 non-governmental organizations, consisted of a series of speeches at Lyon's city labor exchange. "The G-7 presents itself as the pilot of the general ship of world affairs, thus it places itself in a situation of power and responsibility," said Nigerian Nobel Literature Prize laureate Wole Soyinka, who chaired the event. "However," Soyinka noted, the group's collective course "militates against the well-being of the majority of peoples." This, he added, is "leading to mass unemployment, a widening gap between the North and the South and even more profoundly between the affluent and the poor in every society." "We appeal to the members of the G-7 to take stock of their power and its failures, to be aware of the consequences of the policies that they set in motion," he said. The demonstration was one of three staged to coincide with the G-7 summit, which drew here leaders from France, the United States, Canada, Britain, Germany, Italy and Japan.
19960705000000000	France Raises Unemployment Benefits by 2.45 Percent. PARIS, July 4 (Xinhua) - France has raised its unemployment benefits by 2.45 percent as of July 1, announced Denis Gautier-Sauvagnac, president of the unemployment insurance regime of UNEDIC. This brought the minimum unemployment benefit with a system of degressivity to 142.24 francs (27.3 U.S. dollars) a day. Meanwhile, the UNEDIC raised the amount of the "floor" of unemployment benefit, below which the degressivity system can no longer apply, by 4 percent to 92.21 francs (17.7 U.S. dollars) a day. The UNEDIC raised unemployment benefit last in July 1995.
19960801000000000	France's Unemployment Rises Again in June. PARIS, July 31 (Xinhua) -- The number of jobless in France rose by 22,800 in June, which registered a 0.7 percent increase over the previous month and a 4.6 percent rise over the same period last year. According to statistics published today by the French Ministry of Labor, the total number of jobless in France now stands at 3,065,600, or 12.5 percent of the working age population of the country. Le Monde said in a report for its Thursday edition that the rise of unemployment in June was partly attributed to the season, when a large number of youths graduating from school in summer entered the job market. Another reason is that the economic climate in France remains bad, with a near-zero growth or even below-zero growth in the April-May-June period of 1996, said the local daily. Agence France Presse said that the rise of unemployment in June has given ground for speculation of an even darker employment situation, with "rigidity in budget policy and decline in social plans risking to push down a revival." "For the year, the forecasts of specialists are not in the least encouraging. The National Institution of Statistics and Economics Study expects a 12.3-12.5 percent unemployment rate, while the French Observatory of Economic Circumstances expects an unemployed population of 140,000 by the end of the year and 120,000 in the following year," said AFP. Meanwhile, Minister of Labor, Employment and Social Affairs Jacques Barrot said today that the government will subsidize 15-20 billion francs (3-4 billion U.S. dollars) in 1997 to finance employment programs. The opposition Socialist Party said the rise of unemployment underlines the failure of government policy. "Far from taking the seriousness of the employment situation into its conscience, the government is taking measures which will accentuate the tendency towards the rising of unemployment," said Socialist Party spokesman Francois Hollande. He listed as examples of government errors reduction of allocations for the new school year, lay-offs in public sectors and reduction of social plans in the defense industry. The Group of Applied Macro-Economic Analysis (GAMA) said today that the French economy will have a growth of 1.4-1.5 percent in the whole year of 1996. Although the economic growth dropped by 0.3 percent in the April-May-June period, it will grow by 0.9 percent and 1 percent in the next two quarters of the year, said GAMA.
19960820000000000	U.S. Policy on Jobs Differs from European Governments. WASHINGTON, August 19 (Xinhua) -- Resulting from different employment policies, U.S. unemployment has dropped by almost half in the past 15 years while most of major Western nations have shown a strong rise with little sign of improvement. The New York Times said today that the long-term trends emerge from detailed figures that the U.S. Labor Department has just published. The figures showed that the U.S. joblessness peaked at 9.7 percent in 1982, the first full year of President Reagan's administration. It declined steadily for the next seven years, then rose again to 7.5 percent in 1992 when President Clinton was elected. Then it dropped again, hovering in recent months around the 5.6 percent level it reached last year. It stood at 5.4 percent in July. But Japan, which kept its unemployment rate as low as below 2 percent in 1960s and early 1970s, breaking that barrier only in 1976. A slow, steady rise over two decades pushed it over 3.5 percent this year. France and especially West Germany also had a history of keeping unemployment low in the 1960s and early 1970s. But in 1975, West German unemployment more than doubled to 3.4 percent. And joblessness in France also rose sharply to 4.2 percent from 2.9 percent. Since then West Germany's rise has continued, reaching 6.5 percent last year with the percentage in the former East Germany not being included. French unemployment reached 11.5 percent last year and Italy's 12 percent, more than twice the U.S. rate. Figures for Japan, Germany, France and Italy have continued to edge up in 1996. Britain is the only major European country whose joblessness peaked at 11.8 percent in 1983 and dropped to 8.3 percent in 1995. "There's a different focus of the government, especially in France, Germany and Italy," said Mark Anderson, director of international trade for the AFL-CIO. He explained that "they focus more on a fairer distribution of income and not throwing someone on the street to work for whatever wage he or she can get." European governments worry a lot about unemployment, but have failed to reverse the upward trend, the newspaper said. On Thursday a new French law went into effect that encourages businesses to cut working hours and hire more workers. But the paper said that many economists doubt if it will work.
19960907000000000	Frenchmen Sensitive about Poverty, Exclusion: Poll. PARIS, September 6 (Xinhua) -- The fight against poverty and social exclusion is considered by Frenchmen and Frenchwomen as the second most important issue of the country after unemployment, said a poll published by the newspaper "Le Croix" today. The poll was conducted by the SOFRES polling group on August 28-30 on 1,000 people who are above 18 and from different social groups. Fifty-one percent of people aged between 18 and 24 say that they think about poverty and exclusion from time to time, while 34 percent of people above 66 say that they never think about poverty. Only 9 percent of the members of working class say they never think about poverty and exclusion. Fifty-two percent of the polled say they personally know someone who is living in poverty or is in the danger of falling into poverty. Six years ago, 49 percent of Frenchmen said they knew personally someone who was living in poverty. Sixty-two percent of people say that to have five million poor people in France is something unacceptable, while 20 percent say that they feel "disarmed and powerless" in front of the problem of poverty. Ninety-four percent of the Communist Party members polled say the state has not done enough for the poor, while most of the members of rightist groups and Catholic communities say the opposite. Seventy-three percent people say that unemployment of long duration is the principal cause of poverty, followed by the lack of development of job market, and lack of solidarity among people as other causes of poverty.
19970214000000000	OECD Calls on France to Adopt More Flexible. PARIS, February 13 (Xinhua) -- The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) today called on France to adopt more flexible socio-economic policies in its on-going structural reforms. In its 1997 Economic Survey report on France published today, the OECD, which groups 29 industrialized nations, gave credit to the French government over economic growth and cutting public deficits. It said that France's economic growth rate could attain 2.5 percent in 1997, and 2.6 percent in 1998, while its public deficit could drop to 3.2 percent of its gross domestic product (GDP) by the end of 1997. This means that the aim by the French government to attain the Maastricht deficit limit for joining the European single currency, the euro, is within reach, said the report. The OECD said that the real problem France is faced with is not only "cyclical" but also "structural." France is greatly lagging behind other OECD countries in flexibility and de-regulation, especially in budgetary policy and the role played by the state in the country's economy, said the report. It said that as France's public spending is one of the highest among OECD countries in terms of its GDP, it is inevitable for the country to vigorously continue the process of the reform of public spendings. The OECD called on France to pay attention to the reform of its public sector management, pointing out that many other OECD countries have more flexible public sector management. It also called on France to pursue the reform of public spending "beyond Maastricht." "In view of demographic changes, which would suggest that spending pressures are likely to build up after the year 2000, further public spending cuts will probably prove necessary," said the report. The OECD said that the high unemployment rate of France, which stands around 12.5 percent, reflects the "substantial structural impediments in the functioning of labor markets" of the country. But it predicted that France's unemployment should fall over the medium term due to reduction in cyclical unemployment, while the measures taken in recent years, in particular the reduction of the cost of unskilled labor, should reduce structural unemployment. OECD Calls on France to Adopt More Flexible. PARIS, February 13 (Xinhua)-- The OECD report said that the labor costs for low-skilled workers in France are too high, and recommended that wage flexibility should be raised, including reforming the country's minimum wage system, the SMIC. It suggests that the role of minimum wage "as a distributive instrument" be reassessed with the objective of increasing employment opportunities, and that the minimum wage be differentiated by age and region. While recognizing the social performance of the welfare system of France, the OECD also expressed worry over the high costs of France's social protection system, in particular the high cost of unemployment insurance and unemployment compensation rates. "Despite the 1993 reform of the unemployment insurance system, replacement rates (unemployment compensation rates) have remained relatively high for low income earners," it said. It suggested that the problems of unemployment and poverty in France be solved through "making the country's benefit system less generous." The OECD also called on France to reduce restrictions on mass lay-offs by enterprises, and raise restrictions on the renewal of job contracts for an undetermined period of time, and increase the flexibility of work schedules. It said that the costs of mass layoffs and the time they take to implement are "substantial" in France, and that some collective agreements on employment contain "stringent obligations which can severely hamper the pace of restructuring." It also regretted that while French enterprises can lay off workers out of economic difficulties, they cannot legally do this simply for obtaining economic benefits. The report said that since 1992, the supply of part-time jobs has risen substantially in France, where part-time employment was underdeveloped by comparison with other OECD countries in the past. It pointed out that working hour flexibility for full-time workers is "not as yet very developed" in France, even though the relevant legislation has been relaxed. "Since 1994, agreements providing for greater flexibility compensated by an overall reduction in working hours have been allowed, but little progress in striking such agreements has actually been made," it said.
19970523000000000	Blair to Warn EU Partners Against Higher Costs on Jobs. LONDON, May 22 (Xinhua) -- British Prime Minister Tony Blair is to tell his European Union (EU) partners that he would stand in the way of attempts to introduce higher social costs in Britain, according to British government sources. At the special EU summit to be held in the Dutch city Noordwijk on Friday, Blair will say that although the new British government is planning to sign up to the Social Chapter, it is also determined to insist that the 15-nation bloc move to flexible labor markets, government officials said. Blair, whose Labor party won a landslide victory on the May 1 general election, is expected to press the case for Europe to move towards the policies that have encouraged overseas firms to choose Britain as a base for investment. The 43-year-old new British Prime Minister will tell the other EU leaders that there is a third way between the Tory-style non-intervention and the kind of over-regulation that is blamed for imposing extra costs and higher unemployment on France and Germany. He is also expected to make it clear at the summit that he will not allow the Social Chapter to become a means of backdoor imposition on Britain of European legislation on social security and worker involvement on company boards. An authoritative government official was quoted as saying today: "We don't want to lose control of our social security costs. We would veto such extra costs being imposed here."
19970619000000000	Waigel Admits Germany Might Overshoot Euro Debt Target. BONN, June 18 (Xinhua) -- German Finance Minister Theo Waigel admitted today that Germany may slightly overshoot the debt requirement for joining the planned single European currency -- the Euro, but stressed that other criteria would be strictly adhered to. Back from a two-day European Union summit in Amsterdam, Waigel told reporters in Munich that due to the massive debt burden left over from the former East Germany, Bonn could run up a national debt slightly above the Euro benckmark of 60 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). As for another key Euro criterion which requires member states to bring their budget deficits to less than three percent of GDP, Waigel reiterated that three was three, and it should not be softened. Waigel also warned against any delay in the planned 1999 launching of the Euro, saying that a delay would encourage EU countries to ease up on budgetary restraint and would almost certainly lead to a surge in the German mark's value that would threaten Germany's economic recovery, and its chances of reducing unemployment. The Euro is due to be introduced from January 1, 1999. Countries will be selected to take part in early 1998 based on full economic data of 1997. But there remains widespread doubts about the future of the Euro because both Germany and France, the two country at the heart of the project, are struggling to meet the qualification criteria, mainly due to their sluggish economic growth and the cost for financing benefits for record high unemployment. France has openly asked for a softening in the interpretation of the qualification terms of the Euro but Germany has so far insisted on strict adherence.
19971107000000000	Agreement Elusive on European Employment Policy. BRUSSELS, November 6 (Xinhua) -- Two weeks prior to the European Union (EU) job summit, ministers in the European Council still seem far from agreeing on how to iron out their differences. The EU ministers spent a long Wednesday airing their sometimes poles-apart views while discussing the guidelines for member states employment policies in 1998. Wednesday's discussions concluded without an expected press conference, and the discussion continued today for what looked likely to be another prolonged working day for the ministers. Today's meeting was said to be held with consensus that the problem of unemployment has to be solved through entrepreneurship, employability, adaptability and equal opportunity. The ministers agreed that they have to move toward concrete and quantifiable commitments for the guidelines which will be delivered to the job summit. The summit later this month will be in Luxembourg. At stake will be how much each member state has to pay to create a combined total of 25 million more jobs, if the union is to solve the biting issue of unemployment which now runs at an average high of 10.6 percent. Unemployment is as high as 19.2 percent in Spain, 12.6 percent in both Finland and France and 10.7 percent in Ireland. Though the journal of European Report said that unemployment in Germany was at 9.6 percent, the country itself announced its fifth post-war record high of 11.7 percent last month. The EU is already paying 200 billion ECU (229 billion U.S. dollars) each year in unemployment allowances. One EU spokesperson said the union was not calling for extra expenditure on unemployment allowances. It was calling for priorities to be offered in youth employment and long-term employment. European Commissioner Padraig Flynn, in charge of employment and social affairs, said earlier this week that the shared task of the ministers was to ensure that the EU did not remain the zone of high unemployment as it had been for much of the past decade. The EU is dedicating the present week as employment week, and discussions and meetings are focused on the issue. But observers here were left with the impression that before the job summit, the questions of how much to pay in unemployment allowances and in creating more jobs might still remain "a hard nut to crack."
19971225000000000	Unemployment Haunts France This Christmas. PARIS, December 25 (Xinhua) -- The 12.5 percent unemployment rate is haunting the Christmas season in France as militants and unionists staged several protests over the past week against unemployment. French Minister of Employment and Solidarity Martine Aubry Thursday urged the prefectural governments to take care of the unemployed people "in distress" and solve some "emergency cases." French unions, including the Confederation Generale du Travaile, joined the protests for the first time on Wednesday organized by unemployed workers in Paris, demanding a Christmas bonus of 3,000 to 5,000 francs (500 to 840 U.S. dollars) for each unemployed worker. The official unemployment insurance agency UNEDIC had to close its door in Paris Wednesday because of protest activities. Similar protests were staged on the same day in Havre in northern France and in Marseille, and police forced some 40 unemployed people out of an occupied mayoral office building of a district in Marseille. The workers of a Mercedes d'Etoile automobile plant in Valence in southeast France staged a strike on that day to support their manager, who was said to have been fired by the superiors for keeping the workers on the job. Moreover, as big shops reported better Christmas shoppings this year than the last, the question is also centered on social disparity in France. The daily Liberte de l'Est said that one can cite a long list of social conflicts from unemployment to homelessness at this Christmas season. The daily Le Berry Republicain said that Christmas now remains only as a "reserve of remote impressions of fairy-tales," and the daily L'Humanite said that the seemingly rising prosperity as is shown remains to be proved yet. While preparing a law on social solidarity to be presented in February, the government is studying a proposal by the Communist Party to subsidize a 1,500 francs (260 U.S. dollars) social aid for each unemployed workers who are more than 55 years old.
19971230000000000	Unemployment Rate Slightly Drops in France. PARIS, December 30 (Xinhua) -- The unemployment rate in France dropped by 0.3 percent to stand at 12.4 percent in November, said the Ministry of Employment Tuesday. This means that France had 3,114,600 jobless people in November, 9,000 fewer than in October, according to the official way of accounting unemployment. This is also the first time for the unemployment rate in France to be below 12.5 percent since September 1996. The unemployment rate dropped by 0.2 percent and 0.1 percent in Septebmer and October. The drop of unemployment rates among young men and young women below 25 had contributed to the overall improvement of job situation in the country, said the ministry. The jobless rate among young men dropped by 2.2 percent, that that of young women by 1.7 percent in November. But people who remained jobless for more than one year increased by 1.2 percent in November, taking up 36.8 percent of the overall number of the unemployed in France.
19980101000000000	Chirac Gives New Year Good Wish Message. PARIS, December 31 (Xinhua) -- French President Jacques Chirac gave this evening his New Year good wish message to the French people, in which he stressed the need to fight crimes and unemployment in France. In his first public address to the nation since he began to co-habit with the leftwing parliament majority in June, Chirac also appealed to the French people for a rally in preparation for the 21st century. "Twenty-four months only separate us from the year 2000. Time is speeding, changes multiplying, mentalities evolving, and frontiers becoming blurred. We live in a time of uncertainty and difficulty, but also rich of promises and possibilities," he said. He said that there exists too much violence in schools, streets and in public transport, which has become one top worry of the French people together with unemployment. "Each day, the limits are broken beyond which the society will break up. It is today, I know, with unemployment, your primary worry," he said. He stressed that the government would play its role in cracking down crimes and punish those who break the law, which he said is the primary guarantee of freedom. He appealed to all French citizens to take up their responsibilities to protect the republic values of France and be attached to the principle of tolerance. In a clear reference to the extreme-right National Front, Chirac called on the French people to reject all the ideas which endanger the unity of the nation. "Our country is never and will never be the addition of communities existing one by the side of another. The public balance sheet is never and will never be of particular interests," he said. Chirac also called on the French people to better contribute to the construction of the European Union by becoming more flexible in their way of thinking and more creative. "There should be a French ambition: free the force and the energy of our people, create the conditions of richness and activity so that all Frenchmen can profit from it by creating more jobs," he said.
19980104000000000	French Government Takes Measures to Support. PARIS, January 3 (Xinhua) -- The French government Saturday announced several emergency measures to support the jobless people, including sending an additional 500 million franc (84 million U.S. dollars) unemployment aid package. Minister of Employment and Solidarity Martine Aubry said at a press conference that the government will present a law on helping unemployed people before Summer this year, in which a series of measures will be taken in the fields of housing, health care and school. She also promised to continue holding talks with unions and anti-unemployment associations on the terms to be adopted by the government in favor of jobless people. Meanwhile, the government ordered the local governments in prefectures to solve case by case the job problems of people living in distress, and asked them to maintain "emergency cells" responsible for tackling unemployment. France's unemployment rate now stands at 12.4 percent, which means that 3,114,600 people among France's working age population are without jobs. Moreover, 36.89 percent of these people have been seeking jobs for more than one year. Unemployed people staged a series of protests from Christmas through New Year festival by occupying the offices of government agencies in charge of unemployment insurance. Since these emergency cells were set up by the end of December, 2,000 cases of jobless people in distress have been reviewed and 700 of them have been given "positive responses" on finding a job, said the government. The government said that the number of jobs offered increased by 20 percent from November 1996 to November 1997, while the number of lay-offs decreased by 17 percent.
19980112000000000	Chirac Urges Government to Avoid Excluding the Unemployment. PARIS, January 12 (Xinhua) -- French President Jacques Chirac said Monday that the government should be ``particularly careful'' about the problem of social exclusion, which results from long time unemployment. The social cohesion of France is now being threatened by unemployment, exclusion and violence in urban suburbs, the president said in response to escalating protests by the unemployed during a meeting with the press. The protesters have vowed to continue their fight despite aid packages offered by the Socialist government to help jobless persons in desperate situations. Chirac said the law against exclusion, which will be presented by the government to the National Assembly in March, will ``attack the roots of the evil in all fields,'' including unemployment. He also suggested the government turn the money subsidized for social aid programs into investment for jobs. France is running a near-record 12.4 percent jobless rate with a jobless population of 3.1 million, one-third of which has been unemployed for more than a year.
19980114000000000	France's Unemployed Plan More Protests. PARIS, January 14 (Xinhua) -- Associations for the unemployed in France announced Wednesday that they will hold another nationwide protest on Saturday. Thousands of protesters demonstrated in Paris and other cities on Tuesday. Four associations of anti-unemployment militants blamed the government for failing to present new proposals to tackle the 12.4 percent unemployment rate in France, and condemned France's employers for being arrogant toward the unemployed. "The movement should continue. Facing the arrogance of the employers, the silence of the UNEDIC (Union Nationale pour l'Emploi Dans L'Industrie et le Commerce), and absence of new proposals from the government, a dynamic should absolutely continue to find its place," said a communique issued by the associations. The associations also criticized the Socialist government for refusing to revise its 1998 budget to raise the minimum unemployment aid the RMI, and to grant aid to unemployed under the age of 25.
19980204000000000	12,000 Commit Suicide Each Year in France. PARIS, February 3 (Xinhua) -- Some 12,000 people have committed suicide each year in France since 1993, said the official National Institute of Demographical Studies (INED) today. With a suicide rate close to 20 for 100,000 residents in the country, France is ranged the fourth among the Western countries with the highest rates of suicides, after Finland, Denmark, and Austria, said the INED. The major causes for suicides in France are economic crisis, unemployment, isolation as well as a decrease of the number of religious services and practices, said the INED. In 1994, 12,500 people committed suicide in France as compared with 8,300 in 1975 and an average of 6,000 in the 1950s, said the report. The report also said that the age groups that are most vulnerable to suicide are those of younger people, as the number of suicides increased by 3.5 times among the people from 25 to 34 years old and by three times among those from 20 to 24 years old between 1950 and 1995. The number of deaths resulting from suicides in France has now surpassed that of traffic accidents, also one of the highest among Western countries, said the report. The INED report was published on the National Day Against Suicide, which was first held last year.
19981026050300000	Youth violence causes new transit strikes. PARIS (AP) _ Transit workers were on strike in several cities on Monday to protest youth attacks that have plagued public transportation across France, officials said. 
19981127042100000	Job seekers fall by 9,000. PARIS (AP) _ Unemployment fell to 11.6 percent in October from 11.7 percent, the Labor Ministry said Friday. The figure reflects a slow but steady improvement in France's high jobless rate, long one of the nation's knottiest problems. 
19981208071400000	Jobless occupy unemployment offices in south, Paris suburb. PARIS (AP) _ Groups of jobless occupied unemployment offices in southern France and in one Parisian suburb Tuesday, keeping pressure on the government to give them a year-end bonus of 3,000 francs (dlrs 535). 
19981215064900000	Jospin takes offensive, calls for increase in jobless allowance. PARIS (AP) _ French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin went on the offensive Tuesday, calling for an increase in social allowances to end jobless protests and accusing President Jacques Chirac of borrowing his ideas. 
19981221091400000	French poor, jobless protest for more benefits. PARIS (AP) _ Thousands of jobless demonstrated across France on Monday to press the Socialist-led government for a bigger increase in unemployment benefits and a Christmas bonus. 
19981230041000000	French unemployment rates falls to 11.5 percent. PARIS (AP) _ France's unemployment rate dropped slightly to 11.5 percent in November, but nearly 3 million people remain without a job, the Labor Ministry said Friday. 
19990831000000000	Unemployment in France Drops by 1.9 Percent in July. PARIS, August 31 (Xinhua) -- The number of jobless people dropped by 1.9 percent, or 52,600, in July as compared with June, the Ministry of Employment announced on Tuesday. The unemployment rate in France now stands at 11.2 percent, with 2,770,400 people in the labor force in search for a job. At the end of June, the country's unemployment rate is 11.3 percent. Minister of Employment Martine Aubry said that the there is an acceleration in the rhythm of decline in unemployment rate in France and the labor market of the country is now very active. Since the Socialist government of Prime Minister Lionel Jospin came to power in June 1997, about 353,000 jobs have been created, she said. The French government predicted that the growth rate of the gross domestic product in the country will attain from 2.2 to 2.5 percent this year.
20000128000000000	France's Unemployment Rate Drops in December. PARIS, January 28 (Xinhua) -- France's unemployment rate dropped by 1.6 percent in December last year, reducing the nation's jobless people to 2,583,600, said the Ministry of Employment Friday. The unemployment rate of France stood at 10.6 percent at the end of December, the lowest in seven years. A continuous drop of unemployment rate in France has been observed since July 1997, when the Socialist government led by Prime Minister Lionel Jospin came into power. Moreover, the number of jobless people dropped by 11.4 percent, or 333,600 people, from December 1998 to December 1999. The young people under 25 benefited most from the improvement of job market, as the number of jobless among them dropped by 15.9 percent over the past one year. The number of jobless people aged from 25 to 49 dropped by 11.1 percent, and that of those above 50 dropped by 7.3 percent in the past year.
