10000000000000000	Estonia s Economy After Collapse of the Soviet Union What economic policies were adopted by Estonia after the collapse of the Soviet Union and resulted from these policies.
19910425000000000	FT  25 APR 91 / Gorbachev agrees to relax grip on the rebel republics. REBELLIOUS Soviet republics will be allowed to pursue their plans for full independence under the constitution following a landmark agreement between embattled President Mikhail Gorbachev and Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian leader, on a new union treaty. The deal may open the way for a much broader base of political consensus and could bring further agreements on a new government composed of different political forces. It also saved Mr Gorbachev from serious challenge during the first day of a plenary meeting of the Communist Party's Central Committee, at which some hardliners were expected to press for his resignation. A joint statement, published yesterday after being signed on Tuesday night by the two men and eight other leaders of Soviet republic, commits them to an agreement on such a treaty, followed by a new constitution and fresh union elections, as soon as possible. The plan agreed yesterday would also explicitly allow the six other republics - the three Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia plus Armenia, Georgia and Moldavia - the right not to sign a union agreement. These republics were not represented at the meeting. The agreement in turn implies, although the phrasing is vague, that the six could instead proceed to full independence. The statement warns that those republics would then be expected to settle their accounts with the union in hard currency. Mr Yuri Kahn, Estonia's permanent envoy to Moscow, welcomed the declaration as 'progress' even though it would mean paying more for energy and other supplies. 'Of course, economically it will be very difficult but it is a very important step in the direction of a market economy. We understand that sooner or later we must go to world market prices,' he said. Politically, it had the merit of recognising the Baltic states' 'legal right not to sign the union treaty'. Mr Gorbachev's coup in securing agreement on some of the most fundamental issues facing the Soviet Union opens the possibility of further talks on a new form of government bringing in different political forces - or, as some people are calling for, a more powerful Federation Council uniting leaders of the republics under Mr Gorbachev's chairmanship. It also suggests that the Soviet president is moving away from the hardline camp on whose support he has relied in recent months, back to an alliance with more radical forces. In so doing, he risks the wrath of groups such as the Soyuz faction in the union parliament, which has already called for a special congress to review his performance. Mr Gorbachev got the agreement - published yesterday only in the late editions of Pravda, the organ of the Communist Party central committee - just as the central committee was gathering for a plenary meeting at which hardliners had threatened to raise the issue of his future as general secretary. First indications were that he had avoided any serious challenge. Members of the central committee said that specific motions to unseat him had been kept off the agenda. The key to the agreement with the republics apparently lies in the final paragraph which says that its signatories realise that 'these measures are inconceivable without a fundamental increase in the role of the union republics.' A spokesman for the government suggested this would be achieved through economic agreements between the centre and republics. The anti-crisis programme spells out 10 types of economic agreement to be concluded with the republics, in areas ranging from price liberalisation and privatisation to the formation of the budget. Mr Yeltsin's press spokeswoman said that she believed the statement would lead to the start of the 'round table' talks proposed by the Russian leader. At the same time, Mr Yeltsin has lent his authority to a call for an end to strikes and for 'strict compliance with current laws'; to a 'special regime' of work in basic industries; and to a statement which characterised as 'intolerable' any attempts to attain political ends through 'incitement to civil disobedience, strikes or calls for the overthrow of the existing lawfully elected state power bodies'. It was not clear last night whether the agreement would succeed in ending the current wave of strikes, in spite of Mr Yeltsin's considerable authority over striking miners in the Russian Federation. Meanwhile, the Soviet army appeared to be keeping up the pressure in Lithuania by taking over the Agro-Industrial Bank in Vilnius, the capital, in spite of the start of talks between the central government and Lithuania and promises by the Kremlin to resolve disputes by political means. Editorial Comment, Page 20
19910510000000000	FT  10 MAY 91 / Estonia moves cautiously through collectivist web. MR RIHO OLBERG, a 40-year-old Estonian farmer, has never known what it feels like to own the land he farms. Although he lives on the property his great grandfather bought from the German Baron Arthur Konstantin Sternberg in 1897, his only proof of ownership is a deed to roughly 44 hectares dating from the days of the Russian empire. Mr Olberg hopes to be one of the first Estonians to benefit from privatisation. He knows it will be an uphill struggle. 'People are afraid to show too much enthusiasm over private property because they fear a backlash  -that their land will be once again confiscated, collectivised and they will end up in Siberia,' he said. Estonia, one of the three Baltic republics set on independence, is striving to free itself from the bonds of a centrally-planned economy. Privatisation is widely seen as the only path by which the Soviet Union can launch itself into a market economy. For republics such as Estonia, it is also a barometer of the pace of economic reform for foreign investors. Estonia launched its first modest step towards privatisation last year, permitting the sale of state-owned service, trade and catering companies worth up to Rbs500,000 (Pounds 164,000). The results have been modest: a beauty parlour, barber and a florist shop were auctioned in March in the western coastal town of Haapsalu. The republic is planning to take another step soon by selling 17 large enterprises. It intends to put up for sale a 10 per cent stake of all medium and large companies under the control of the Estonian state: these would include seven companies during the first half of this year and a further 10 later this year. However, Mr Ardo Kamratov, head of the Estonian department of state property, believes there are pitfalls. For example, companies' shares are to be offered first to their workers, then to local inhabitants and only then to outsiders, including foreigners. The seven large companies up for total privatisation include Baltika and two other textile companies, Talleks, which builds excavators, and TLN Taksopark, Tallinn's taxi company. In early April, Estonia passed legislation which attempted to set the framework for returning land confiscated after 1940 to its rightful owners. Those who are eligible and want to reclaim land owned up to June 1940, when Estonia was illegally annexed by Moscow, must apply to the Estonian authorities before next January. As a measure against speculation, land will only be returned to those who will make it produce, according to Mr Pajo. If the owners cannot work the land, they will be compensated, possibly with Estonian bonds or cash. Difficult questions such as assessing the price of land and determining compensation have not yet been addressed. And there are fears that Estonia cannot guarantee private property will never again be confiscated. Mr Maido Pajo, the Estonian deputy minister of agriculture, admitted that the privatisation process in the countryside had been hindered by the collective and state farms, which are important social units providing education, housing and an economic livelihood for their workers. Fifty years ago, when 60 per cent of Estonians lived in the countryside (only 30 per cent do so today), there were about 140,000 farms of 25-50 hectares, with a few of 1,000 hectares. Today's collective and state farms are between 3,000 and 15,000 hectares and are home to anywhere from 200 to 1,000 people. Most of the rural land in Estonia is controlled by collective and state farms. As a first step towards privatisation, some of these farms have already been made into co-operatives. Mr Olberg has been chastised by many of his fellow farmers for believing too passionately in private property. But he has not lost his sense of humour. 'I have been normal all my life,' he says. 'The truth is that most of the people who live around these parts have been abnormal because they don't believe that a human can own land.'
19920102000000000	FT  02 JAN 92 / Finns fearful for Baltic joint ventures. FINNISH companies account for most of the investment in joint ventures in neighbouring Estonia, but some businesses fear that chaos in the rest of the former Soviet Union could hamper further foreign projects. Of the roughly 250 joint ventures established in the former Soviet republic in the past four years, 120 are of Finnish origin. Only a handful, though, are up and running so far. Estonia is better placed for foreign investment than neighbouring Latvia and Lithuania because of close linguistic, cultural and geographic ties with Finland and consequently with the rest of the Nordic region. 'Considering how expensive production and labour costs are in Finland, it is only natural that many Finnish companies like ourselves are keenly seeking to set up production units in Estonia,' says Mr Christian Grondhal, senior vice- president of Novera, a Finnish construction and agricultural machinery group which owns 51 per cent of Estonia Engineering, a Finnish-Estonian joint venture. However, Mr Grondhal warns that if labour and production costs rise sharply, Estonia will lose its attractiveness to foreign investors. Salaries are low in Estonia by western standards, in some cases between Dollars 10 and Dollars 20 a month. But many Estonians are already offering office rent at prices similar to Helsinki's, although one foreign company has been reported as paying Dollars 4 a month for office space in the centre of Tallinn. Apart from Novera, which plans to build a prefabricated bathrooms production unit in Tallinn, other Finnish companies are also setting up similar facilities in Estonia. Ahlstrom a Finnish boiler group, will build a glass-wool plant in eastern Estonia, and Partek and Lohja, two construction groups, will begin to fabricate building materials. New trade agreements between Finland and Estonia, which will be ratified this year, are expected to encourage such a development. If approved by the Finnish parliament, Estonian manufactured goods should be able to enter Finland without any tariff restrictions. But the process of rebuilding Estonia's obsolete industry will be an expensive endeavour. Last October, Imatran Voima and Vattenfall, respectively Finnish and Swedish utility groups, and the Estonian Ministry of Industry and Energy signed a co-operation agreement to begin the process of modernising Estonia's ageing power sector. Some analysts say the task of modernising Estonia's energy sector to meet western standards will the require investments of billions of Finnish marks. According to Mr Grondhal, trading has been the most important activity of Estonia Engineering, a medium-sized joint venture by Estonian standards. Its turnover has increased from FM10m (Dollars 2.4m) in autumn 1989-1990 to an estimated FM13m-FM15m this year. 'Even if we offer the expertise and, most important, solve the financing problem for Estonian dairies, fisheries and slaughterhouse through complex barter arrangements,' said Mr Grondhal, 'these trade arrangements in some cases may take a year to work out.' One recent example was a fishery in eastern Estonia, on Lake Peipsi. Through Novera Group's European contacts, Estonia Engineering helped the local fishery to acquire a FM3.5m cold-storage space with a capacity of 500 tonnes, through the sale of fish. The local fishery paid the fish to Estonia Engineering, which in turn sold it for hard currency in the west. Other items which Estonia Engineering has been able to sell from Estonia in the west through barter and cash deals are hides, powdered milk, cheese and butter. Mr Aarne Rapp general manager of Estonia Engineering, believes hardships await his country as it attempts to shake off the vestiges of half a century of Moscow rule. 'Chaos in Russia and chronic shortages of commodities in Estonia can become strong disincentives for Finnish and foreign firms to invest in this country,' he concludes. 'Such a situation would spell disaster.
19920124000000000	FT  24 JAN 92 / Estonian cabinet forced to resign. THE government of Estonia resigned yesterday - the second post-Soviet government to fall after Georgia's was forced out of office earlier this month. Mr Edgar Savisaar, the former communist whose two-year tenure as prime minister saw Estonia move towards free prices and a market economy, paid the political price when his request for a 'State of Economic Emergency' designed to push through reforms was first narrowly passed by deputies, then effectively torpedoed by parliament's refusal this week to set up a commission to implement the State of Emergency. The Estonian news agency ETA reported that Mr Savisaar had proposed that Mr Arnold Ruutel, chairman of the parliament, should head a new government - though it was not clear if he would, like Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, combine that with the position of head of state. Estonia, like the other two Baltic states dependent on Russia for energy, has in the past month had to cut heating to offices and homes and ration fuel supplies since Russia began charging world prices for its energy - although it is paid for in goods through a barter system. A new agreement with Russia to supply extra fuel was signed last week. Plans for monetary reform based on the introduction of the Estonian crown, originally planned for the middle of this year, have been postponed until next April, according to Mr Siim Kallas, president of the Estonian central bank. Mr Kallas told trade union leaders this week that unemployment would rise as Estonian enterprises failed to sell their goods on the world market. President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania yesterday called on western governments and institutions to provide a stabilisation fund to back the introduction of a new national currency and support market reforms, writes Anthony Robinson in London. Lithuania, he said, was looking for around Dollars 1bn (Pounds 555m), equivalent to the sum provided to Poland two years ago to back its stabilisation policies. But Poland has more than 10 times more people. Mr Landsbergis made clear that Lithuania does not consider itself a successor state to the former Soviet Union and should not be treated as such by western creditors seeking repayment of Soviet foreign debt. It would, however, repay credits of around Dollars 100m which had been used directly in Lithuanian projects, he added.
19920129000000000	FT  29 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Move on Estonia debt repayment. ESTONIA may be exempted from repaying debts to Britain dating from before the Soviet invasion in 1940. The debts include Republic of Estonia bond issues worth about Pounds 600,000 (Dollars 1.02m) held by British nationals before the Soviet annexation of the Baltic state. Representatives of the Estonian government and Bank of Estonia have met officials from the Bank of England, Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Treasury in London to discuss outstanding financial claims between the two countries. Britain announced last week it has agreed to return gold deposits to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The gold was deposited with the Bank of England in 1940 at the time of the Soviet takeover, and was sold on the open market by the UK government in 1967 for Pounds 5.8m, much to the Baltic states' annoyance. However, it seems likely that following the resolution of the gold issue, Estonia and Britain will waive outstanding claims. According to Foreign Office documents, Estonia's debts to British nationals amount to Pounds 609,587, relating to a sterling bond issue and a dollar bond issue, while Estonian assets - excluding the gold - held in the UK amount to Pounds 492,907, including bank accounts and securities. Last year, Estonia hinted the state was prepared to honour its debts, although now this will not be necessary.
19920327000000000	FT  27 MAR 92 / World News in Brief: Return journey. The UK government is to hand back to Estonia more than Pounds 30m in gold frozen by the Bank of England since the Second World War.
19920429000000000	FT  29 APR 92 / IMF gloomy on outlook for the Baltic republics. THE International Monetary Fund has delivered a grim prognosis for the economies of the three Baltic republics. In separate studies of the three newly independent countries, the IMF describes the economic outlook for Latvia and Lithuania this year as 'bleak', while it calls Estonia's economic situation 'precarious'. Latvia faces a drop in real gross domestic product of as much as 30 per cent this year after an 8 per cent decline in 1991. Some enterprises are being forced to halt activity because of shortages of energy and other raw materials. In Lithuania, many enterprises will face the same fuel shortages unless the disruption to trade with other republics of the former Soviet Union is overcome. Even if it succeeds in this, the IMF expects Lithuania's output to decline by at least 15 per cent and possibly by more than 30 per cent, on top of the 20 per cent decline recorded in 1990-91. Estonia's 'already precarious economic situation' has been exacerbated, the IMF says, by the dislocation of its trade with other former Soviet republics and the shock caused by the higher cost of imports at world market prices. 'The prospect for 1992 is for a further fall in real GDP, perhaps of the order of 20 per cent, even if trade relations with other republics can be normalised,' the Fund's study warns. Inflation has raged in all three republics, topping 200 per cent last year in Lithuania and Estonia and exceeding 300 per cent in Latvia. The republics plan to introduce their own currencies, but this may be delayed until later this year. While they continue to use the rouble, their inflation performance will be tied to Russia's. For Estonia, inflation may exceed 400 per cent this year, the IMF says, but in Lithuania the introduction of its new currency, the litas, 'will provide an opportunity to achieve a sharp reduction in the wage-price spiral'.  ------------------------------------------ IMF REVIEW OF BALTIC ECONOMIES 1991  ------------------------------------------               Latvia  ------------------------------------------ GDP                           7.9%. Consumer prices              +317%. Real net wages              -21.6%.  ------------------------------------------             Lithuania  ------------------------------------------ Net material product        -12.8%. Retail prices              +224.7%. Net wages (approx)             20%.  ------------------------------------------              Estonia  ------------------------------------------ GDP                         -10.8%. Consumer price index       +211.8%. Real wages                  -39.4%.  ------------------------------------------
19920601000000000	FT  01 JUN 92 / Estonia to bring in own currency this month. ESTONIA plans to phase out the rouble and join the D-Mark zone when the Baltic state later this month becomes the first part of the former Soviet empire to introduce its own currency. Detailing a move which brings full circle 52 years of tortuous history, Mr Siim Kallas, president of the Bank of Estonia, said he intends to carry out the long-awaited currency reform before the end of June. 'The desire to have our own currency is so big that the advantages outweigh the possible disadvantages,' he told the Financial Times. The Estonian currency, the kroon, suppressed in August 1940 in the Soviet takeover, will be allowed to fluctuate 3 per cent either side of a central D-Mark rate. The link has been closely discussed with the German Bundesbank. Although the Bundesbank will be under no obligation to support the kroon, 'the Germans have nothing against the link,' Mr Kallas said. The Bank of Estonia has been given an independent statute closely modelled on the Bundesbank Law. Estonian leaders stressed at the weekend that the kroon's reintroduction marks an important step towards recovering the country's still-restricted sovereignty. The kroon will be backed primarily by 11.3 tonnes of gold in Estonia's newly reconstituted monetary reserves. New kroon banknotes, to replace the estimated 3bn roubles in circulation, are stored in strategic spots around the country. They have been printed by the British banknote company, De La Rue. Total roubles, including deposits, to be replaced amount to Rbs13bn - Rbs14bn. Speaking of the coming currency switch, Mr Arnold Ruutel, the Estonian president, said: 'We can no longer remain in the rouble zone. It has no value. People have no incentive to work.' He warned, however, that Estonia was 'aware of the problems' of suddenly introducing a convertible currency. Unemployment in the 1.5m population state was likely to rise to 100,000 by the end of the year. The currency reform is being worked out in close collaboration with the International Monetary Fund, which Estonia has just joined. An IMF team is due in Tallinn at the end of this week. A delegation of trade ministers and state bank chiefs from the Commonwealth of Independent States is also coming on Friday to discuss the new arrangements. Mr Kallas, just back from a trip to the IMF, said he hoped the reform would psychologically boost Estonia's depressed economy. 'The whole economy is waiting for the kroon.' The IMF is predicting a 20 per cent fall in real gross domestic product this year, but Mr Kallas said there were signs the worst of the collapse was over. Estonia would negotiate a standby credit from the IMF, and was discussing mobilising its gold through 'swap' credits through the Bank for International Settlements. Total monetary reserves are about Dollars 120m, of which all but about Dollars 10m represents gold. Mr Kallas hoped part of the Dollars 250m in foreign currency deposits held abroad by Estonian individuals and enterprises would return to the central bank after the reform. The freshly printed kroons are ready to be handed out by 22,000 helpers in 700 exchange points around the country. The exact date and conversion details had not been decided, but Mr Kallas said the exchange rate to the D-Mark could be similar to that of the Austrian schilling. The operation might take place on the weekend of June 20-21, the 44th anniversary of the introduction of the D-Mark in western Germany on June 20, 1948. Mr Kallas visited Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank vice-president, in Frankfurt a month ago to discuss the conversion. Mr Tietmeyer warned him that the operation was not comparable to the dramatic entry of the D-Mark into eastern Germany on July 1, 1990, which paved the way for reunification. 'Then we just took over,' Mr Kallas quoted Mr Tietmeyer as saying. On this occasion - for the first time for half a century - the Estonians will be in charge.
19920618000000000	FT  18 JUN 92 / Estonia to issue its own currency. ESTONIA will issue its own currency, the kroon, on June 20-22, becoming the first former Soviet republic to abandon the rouble zone and introduce a separate national currency. The kroon is to be tied to the German D-Mark, with a 3 per cent fluctuation band allowed. But its initial exchange rate against the D-Mark has yet to be fixed, as has the rate for conversion of cash roubles into kroons. The kroon is to be the only legal tender in Estonia and all hard currency accounts will be converted into the new currency. But this could be a problem if doubts about the kroon's convertibility arise. Estonia, with only 1.5m people, has just Dollars 120m in gold - as well as central bank-owned stretches of forest - with which to back its currency. Trade with the rouble zone could be seriously disrupted. An agreement for clearing payments has been agreed only with Ukraine, but a draft treaty with Russia, with which Estonia conducts over half its trade and from which it gets vital fuel supplies, has not yet been signed. Success or failure of the kroon will determine the course taken by other former Soviet republics anxious to dump the 'occupation rouble'. Ukraine has signalled that it will issue its own currency later this summer if the Estonian move is successful. Estonia's two Baltic neighbours, Latvia and Lithuania, have already taken steps towards new currencies.
19920907000000000	FT  07 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: EC joins in loan for Baltic states. THE European Community intends to provide a Dollars 300m (Pounds 150.7m) medium-term loan to help the three Baltic republics reduce their balance of payments deficit. The EC loan will make up half of a Dollars 600m package of loans to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia from the Group of 24 industrialised nations. So far some Dollars 260m of loans have been committed by other G24 nations, with members of the European Free Trade Association shouldering a large part of the burden. Most of the remaining Dollars 40m should come from the US. EC finance ministers agreed provisionally to go ahead with their half of the loan package during their weekend meeting in Bath. The Community should give its formal approval to the Baltic loan at a formal meeting this autumn. A year ago, in advance of the first EC mission to the Baltic states, Brussels officials estimated that the three republics would require between Dollars 2bn and Dollars 3bn annually in the form of emergency and technical assistance, project loans and balance of payments aid. Since then the economic situation has deteriorated still further. An IMF study published in April forecast a 30 per cent drop in Latvian GDP this year and a 15 to 30 per cent decline in Lithuanian output. The Dollars 600m G24 loan is supposed to apply to this year, and Mr Henning Christophersen, the EC finance commissioner, said after the Bath meeting that he expected a quick decision on the EC half of the loan within the next few weeks. Discussion of the EC economy and the need to calm foreign exchange markets swept most other items off the Bath agenda, but ministers did have time over lunch to hear from Mr Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Mr Attali urged ministers to improve the flow of trade between the Community and eastern Europe. Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor of the exchequer, who chaired the meeting, later reiterated the EC's intention to move to 'a more liberal trading position with eastern Europe'. He invited Mr Attali to address finance ministers later during the British presidency of the EC.
19920908000000000	FT  08 SEP 92 / Moscow tackles state enterprises' arrears. THE Russian central bank has moved to tackle arrears accumulated by Russian state-owned enterprises in dealings with those in other former Soviet republics but denied this signalled a further expansion of central bank credits. It said a 'netting out' of debts would be completed by the end of November. But it was not clear how the net arrears still outstanding after that to Russian enterprises by republics in the rest of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Georgia would be financed. The Russian central bank plans to issue guarantees for Russian enterprises to receive credit to get over the non-payments by other republics. All republics can issue central bank credits and all of them are short of budget revenues. In another deal stressing creativity in relations with republics, Russia said it would give Lithuania two torpedo boats and two small anti-submarine vessels for undertaking to build flats for some of the army officers who are to due be pulled out of the Baltic republics. Moscow, which also undertook to supply Lithuania with oil this year and the next, yesterday signed a trade pact with Estonia to guarantee free trade and energy supplies. The agreement has been reached despite Moscow's continuing unhappiness with the treatment of Russians in Estonia as second-class citizens.
19921119000000000	FT  19 NOV 92 / The winter of discontent: The three Baltic states are struggling with economic hardships and the problem of Russian minorities. The first Soviet republics to achieve independence - Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia - have also been among the first to experience the harsher side of freedom. Half their population of some 8m live in poverty; heating and lighting are minimal. The leaders of the three Baltic states are concerned about surviving the winter - rightly, since the Lithuanians have just rejected the government of the Sajudis nationalist movement in general elections. The three states assume that, when winter is over, the worst will be behind them. But the worst could be to come. Unemployment is starting to rise sharply; prices, which have risen steeply in recent months, are expected to increase further, albeit at a slower rate; and the big state-owned enterprises have yet to be restructured or privatised. The difficulties facing the Baltic states are manifold: their economies are in decline; their criteria for citizenship are undefined or controversial; government institutions are embryonic. Lithuania's nationalist government, headed by Mr Vytautas Landsbergis, was rejected because of the country's privation. The weakness of the country's political institutions has now provoked a dogfight over the transfer of power to the Democratic Labour party of Mr Algirdas Brazauskas, the former Communist leader. The Estonian and Latvian leaderships fear unemployment - most of all among their large Russian minorities, which they have not yet granted full citizenship, and which could rebel against the building of states of which they are not yet members. Yet these are societies in transition. They have formal statehood, political plurality, constitutions in place, membership of the main international organisations, embassies at home and abroad. They have flags, anthems, national guards, sports teams, media and airlines. All have re-established the independence they enjoyed until 1940. There is no present danger that these states will collapse back into a Russian embrace. At stake, rather, is whether they will for years be plagued with instability and poverty, or instead achieve a modest but productive place in the north-eastern corner of Europe. First, their successes. All have introduced a currency - though only the Estonian kroon is hard, backed by gold returned to the republic from the Bank of England and pegged at 8 kroon to the D-Mark. The link with the German currency has helped bring inflation down from 24 per cent a month in July to 7 per cent in September. The Latvian rublis has remained more or less stable against the hard currencies - now about 160 to the US dollar - but is backed 'mainly by faith', according to Mr Uldis Klauss, a central bank adviser. The Lithuanian talonas is less stable, with a market price of 200-plus to the dollar, and fluctuates widely. All the Baltic countries have begun privatisation: Lithuania claims to have privatised more than 50 per cent of state-owned dwellings; all have at least begun the sale of shops and small businesses. On Tuesday, the Estonian Privatisation Agency announced an international tender to privatise 38 state-owned companies. Mr Andres Bergman, the agency's head, said the aim was to tempt foreign investors to become 'part of a manufacturing centre for northern Europe'. The first list of Latvian companies to be privatised had to submit their plans yesterday - both foreigners and Latvians can bid for shares. But to most Balts the price they are paying for the transition to independence still seems high. The International Monetary Fund, of which all three are members, has laid down a standard programme of monetary and fiscal discipline and rapid movement towards convertible currencies and privatised property. 'We are sticking to the IMF plan, absolutely, 100 per cent,' says Mr Ivars Godmanis, the Latvian prime minister. 'But it's very hard: how our old people will live this winter I don't know.' Mr Teet Rajasalu, of Estonia's Institute of Economics, reckons purchasing power has dropped by more than half since the currency was introduced earlier this year because of the steep rise in the price of imports, including energy. 'By early next year our prices might reach world market levels - but not our wages.' Only Estonia, under President Lennart Meri and Premier Mart Laar, is unambiguously pro-market. One deputy from the ruling Fatherland bloc of parliamentary parties spoke of the ethical nature of sex shops (now opening in Tallinn) because they efficiently match demand with supply. Mr Ivar Raig, head of the parliament's budget committee, calls for a 'real privatisation of land and companies, not the timid steps we have so far taken. This is the basic mission of our government.' The other two states, while seeing no alternative to market reform, hesitate. The Latvian premier, Mr Godmanis, heads a fissiparous coalition. To make his ambitious privatisation plans work he will need a more coherent government to be elected next spring. The central bank under Mr Eynart Repshe has a tight control of the money supply - so much so that Latvia's credit-starved enterprises are threatening strikes. Lithuania's state companies are still receiving credit from the central bank but production has tumbled and productivity has halved over the past year. Lithuania, where a new left-of-centre government is now being formed, is the first to suffer a backlash against market policies, though all agree that the attempts to break up and sell off the state farms in the country were badly handled. 'There could be real hunger this winter,' warns Mr Brazauskas, although he insists the country will not 'in principle' deviate from the IMF's narrow path. For the politicians and the people throughout the region, economic problems dwarf the crises of the state and of citizenship. The fall of Mr Landsbergis is a warning that patriotism - and the hatred of the Soviet past which saw hundreds of thousands of Balts slaughtered or sluiced through the gulag a mere four decades ago - are not enough to keep voters' support. Yet in Estonia and Latvia, where most Baltic Russians live, there is no question that the state's policy of withholding citizenship is popular with the ethnic majority. Mr Meri, urbane in his presidential mansion, is inclined to dismiss Russian protests against unequal treatment of the minority. He regards the threat by Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, to delay the withdrawal of troops from the Baltics as no more than posturing for the nationalists in his own country. After talks with Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian deputy foreign minister, Mr Meri said: 'We have agreed a kind of truce. Mr Churkin said that the impression given that troop withdrawals were linked to human rights here is wrong.' In practice, said Mr Meri, laws demanding two-year residence and command of the language will be relaxed to allow more non-ethnic Estonians to become citizens. Both Estonia and Latvia have returned to the independent status they enjoyed in 1940 and based citizenship on those people, and their descendants, who were citizens before the Soviet annexation. This excludes nearly all Russians, since the Soviet immigration was of workers, bureaucrats, soldiers and secret policemen. It means, as Mr Meri cheerfully explains, that the Russians are 'not second-class citizens, they are non-citizens'. Mr Godmanis says he is content to see Russians become Latvian citizens, though less relaxed about the presence of 40,000 Russian troops, the largest presence in the Baltic states. He says that 'the citizenship question will have to be defined by the next parliament' - though since most Russians presently cannot vote, it will not represent them. A UN human rights commission, invited into Latvia by Mr Godmanis, is now preparing a report on the civil rights of non-ethnic Latvians. Mr Godmanis rejects any suggestion that the state is discriminatory. His - and the Estonians' - overriding need is to re-establish the state on the basis of its ethnic majority, and to ensure thereafter that the admission of others to citizenship is done on an individual basis. Mr Churkin said on a flight back to Moscow that he was sure that the pull-out of his country's troops by next August would go ahead as agreed. Mr Brazauskas, who does not have this problem, believes the Russian threat in the Baltics no longer exists. He dismisses the possibility of a reactionary takeover in Moscow followed by a renewed thrust to the north on the pretext of protecting ethnic Russians. Neither Mr Meri nor Mr Godmanis share that insouciance. Mr Godmanis makes the point that 'until the people see their government control the army, they will not feel that they have a real government'. But none of the new crop of western ambassadors in the Baltic states believes that there is a serious Russian threat. The last crisis, that of the state itself, can only be solved with time. It is first a matter of people; none of the new politicians were in the habit of making decisions, and thus they tend not to. Some ministers are learning. Mr Godmanis in Latvia is determined and tough; Mr Laar and Ms Lia Henne, Estonian deputy prime minister for economic reform, appear intelligent and quick; in Lithuania, Mr Vytenis Aleshkaitis, the economic reform minister, has won glowing reviews from the little circle of foreign advisers and may stay in the new 'technocratic' government promised by Mr Brazauskas. But the ministries they run are still rudimentary. One minister spent a day adjudicating on where to put a photocopier donated by a foreign government. In all the Baltic ministries, groups of men and women sit gossiping just like in the old Soviet days when it did not matter if they worked or not. It is on the streets where the real money is being made - much of it illegal. The Baltics have become conduits for metals traders - men who make unwritten contracts for the supply of lead, copper, zinc and aluminium and ship it across lightly guarded borders and ports. Bribery is not uncommon. They are the nouveaux riches of the cities, flashing about in Mercedes cars and frequenting the hard-currency bars, where they are tolerated for the business they bring. And the old reflexes of cheating the state live on. Yet there are also men and women, young and old, who will remain in cold offices late into the night, trying to master the new demands. This will be a hard time, but the three states on the Baltic are still moving westwards.  ----------------------------------------------  THE BALTIC STATES: COLD COMFORTS OF FREEDOM  ---------------------------------------------- ESTONIA  ---------------------------------------------- Capital:                            Tallinn Population:                            1.6m Russian-speaking population:                            *35% Inflation October:                    **10% Minimum wage:          *Dollars 2 per month Currency & rate:      Kroon 12.7: Dollars 1  ---------------------------------------------- LATVIA  ---------------------------------------------- Capital:                               Riga Population:                            2.7m Russian-speaking population:                       *over 40% Inflation October:                    **25% Minimum wage:         *Dollars 10 per month Currency & rate:      rubils 160: Dollars 1  ---------------------------------------------- LITHUANIA  ---------------------------------------------- Capital:                            Vilnius Population:                            3.7m Russian-speaking population:                             *9% Inflation October:                    **27% Minimum wage:         *Dollars 10 per month Currency & rate:    talonas: 200+ Dollars 1  ----------------------------------------------
19921216000000000	FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (12): Hopes for Hanseatic revival - Hamburg, Europe's biggest port, gets a new role. IT WAS back in 1987, when local election fever was building up in the northern German Land of Schleswig-Holstein, that Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the Social Democrat opposition, hit on the idea of the 'new Hansa.' His idea was to revive something of the great old Hanseatic trading tradition, which linked the northern German ports like Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck in a commercial empire stretching around the Baltic Sea. It was not simply an idea of promoting trade, says Dr Werner Jann, director of the Schleswig-Holstein government's Denkfabrik (think tank) in Kiel. Behind it lay a conviction that Schleswig-Holstein was locked into a pattern of thinking that it was on the periphery of real Europe, picking up the scraps of trade and investment from the wealthy economic crescent running from southern England, through the Benelux countries, the Ruhr and southern Germany to northern Italy. 'Mr Engholm was the one who brought these north European contacts much more into the public eye,' Dr Jann says. 'It was against a much broader background. He asked the question: 'What will happen when the European single market comes about?' 'There was a danger that Europe would orientate itself much more towards its rich heartland, the famous banana curve from London to Milan. What was going to happen in the north? 'Mr Engholm said we should try to define an independent identity as a region. It was no good just wringing our hands and saying: 'We are so far away.' What we needed was the inspiration of the Baltic region as a region of the future.' That was all before it became apparent that eastern Europe was going to open up both politically and economically, making the ambition of a great increase in pan-Baltic links suddenly more realistic, and more attractive. Mr Engholm went on to win the 1988 election in Schleswig-Holstein. Today, as national leader of the SPD, he is the most likely challenger for the German chancellorship. One of his first acts in Kiel was to set up the Denkfabrik, with the task of putting practical flesh on the bones of his idea. The result was a study proposing a whole range of future links in the economy, science and research, culture and the environment. 'Our aim was not just to promote government-to-government contacts, but to get the whole private sector involved in greater co-operation,' says Dr Jann. 'We suggested that chambers of trade and industry had greater common interests, and universities.' Thus, for example, the chambers of commerce in Schleswig-Holstein and south Sweden have set up a 'co-operation exchange,' and the city chambers of Kiel and Gdansk, in Poland, have signed a co-operation agreement. A BaltChamber has been established to represent the entire region. Another joint initiative came from Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar (the head of Volvo) and Mr Engholm, to set up the North European Club, a regular forum of business leaders from the region. Its aims are to investigate and promote improvements in transport and communication infrastructure, scientific collaboration, environmental management, and cultural and youth exchanges. The club is now seeking to find new business leaders from the emerging economies of eastern Europe as members - still few and far between. In the whole exercise, Schleswig-Holstein is co-operating closely with neighbouring Hamburg, the great port which adds a whole new dimension of services to attract Scandinavian investors - whether they choose to set up in the city itself, or in the cheaper hinterland. Indeed, Hamburg itself is setting up a big East European trade centre, to exploit its new position as a link between east and west. This summer, Mr Engholm took a trip to Gdansk, Kaliningrad and Tallinn to underline the east European side of his Baltic commitment, signing co-operation deals with each authority along the way. In Poland, for example, he signed an agreement to give Polish agricultural specialists six months training and practical experience in Germany. In Kaliningrad, Mr Engholm promised not to allow the promised Via Baltica - the trunk road planned to run from Hamburg via Rostock and Gdansk to Tallinn and St Petersburg - to bypass the Russian enclave. The whole area, he agreed, desperately needed better communications to develop into a centre of Baltic co-operation. As for Estonia, where co-operation is already well advanced, Schleswig-Holstein agreed to found and support a new economic academy, and both sides agreed to expand the existing freight ferry service between Kiel and Tallinn to include passengers. Quite apart from promoting better communications for its Baltic partners, Schleswig-Holstein needs them at home. There is an urgent need for a new link across the Elbe at Hamburg, to prevent that city from being a bottleneck instead of a facility to north-south trade. At the same time, even more grandiose plans for a fixed link across the Fehmarn Belt, cutting the travelling time between Copenhagen and Hamburg to two hours by high-speed train, are well advanced. The ambition is to have in place a privately-financed rail link, possibly with a road link as well, by the year 2003. All efforts at co-operation, it must be said, have yet to show real achievement in terms of trade and investment flows. Schleswig-Holstein is less involved in regional trade than most of the other littoral states: in overall trade, just 19 per cent of the Land's external ties in 1990 were with other Baltic states - Finland has about 47 per cent. 'All these things take time to work through,' says Dr Jann. 'One single big contract could change the whole picture.' Given the planned enlargement of the European Community to include Sweden, Norway and Finland, Mr Engholm and his colleagues are convinced that the position as a poor northern cousin in Germany is about to change. He no longer sees the EC internal market as a threat, but as an opportunity. FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (4): 50 years in the shadow - Finland's attitude towards an open Baltic has been muted. FINLAND has been somewhat less than enthusiastic about the opening up of the Baltic area. Caution has been an understandable watchword in policy making for a country which since 1944 has learned how to survive under the shadow of Moscow. President Mauno Koivisto aroused international criticism when he appeared to criticise the high risk tactics of the Latvian and Lithuanian governments during the tense days of January 1991 when the infamous para-military Soviet Black Berets acted violently. Since those events Finland has taken a more sympathetic attitude to the countries of central and eastern Europe. In 1991 the government provided FM221m (Dollars 54.4m) in grant assistance with a further FM247m (Dollars 55.67m) allocation this year. The Finnish Department for Export Credits has provided commercial credits worth FM50m (Dollars 11.2696m) to Estonia and FM7m (Dollars 1.578) for technical help in the Baltic states. Earlier this year 100,000 tons of heating oil were dispatched by Finland to help Estonia through its grim winter. At the beginning of 1992 Finland established technical assistance funds in the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation of FM3m (Dollars 0.726m)and FM1.5m (Dollars 0.363m) respectively. A number of Finnish private companies are also taking a keen interest in the opening up of the eastern side of the Baltic to the rigours of the market economy. This is particularly true in the transport sector. Neste, the state-owned oil conglomerate, is establishing badly needed petrol filling stations throughout the region in Warsaw, St Petersburg and Riga. It is campaigning actively for the development of the Via Baltica - a modernised motorway that it is hoped will link the area with western Europe early in the next century. Finland's Baltic role has to be seen in a much wider context. Finnish foreign minister Paavo Vayrynen claims that his country is the only developed market economy which shares a common border with Russia. This has meant a focusing of Finnish assistance on specific areas close to Finland - Murmansk, Karelia and the St Petersburg area. But at the same time trade between Finland and Russia has almost collapsed in the aftermath of the abolition of the mutually beneficial bilateral clearing house system that operated successfully from 1948 to 1990. Like Sweden, Finland is also going through a severe economic recession with sizeable cuts in its own domestic spending programmes and a squeeze on Finnish living standards. Such unprecedented belt tightening has not put the traditionally insular Finns in an altruistic mood to shoulder any Baltic responsibilities. Finnish relations with Estonia promise understandably to be the closest. The languages of the two countries are similar and their geographical proximity over the Gulf of Finland ensured that even at the height of the Cold War ties were not cut completely. In 1964 President Urho Kekkonen visited Estonia, followed by trade and cultural contacts and the opening of a consular office in Tallinn in 1970. Finnish-owned hotel chains and transport companies are particularly active in improving Estonia's attraction for business customers, while Finnish administrators and businessmen are helping the Estonian reform programme. FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (1): End of a long dark winter - The collapse of Soviet hegemony offers the Baltic countries an opportunity to restore historic connections. THE Cold War which chilled the Baltic region for nearly half a century is over, and with it the sterile balance of fear which turned many Baltic harbours into naval bases and reduced east-west trade to a trickle. Instead of a highway, like the Mediterranean, this northern inland sea became a backwater: a cordon sanitaire between the Nordic world and the Slavic hinterlands. It was divided between the flourishing market economies of its northern and far western shores and the impoverished, Soviet-dominated south and east. Now, the disappearance of these artificial divisions has created a sudden and unexpected opportunity to restore old connections and establish new networks for the 95m people, with an aggregate gross national product of Dollars 600bn, who live in the lands which drain into the Baltic sea. Optimists such as Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, believe that 'liberation of the economies of north western Russia and the Baltic states, and the entry of Finland, Sweden and Norway into the emerging European Union, is a powerful combination that promises to turn northern Europe into a growth region in the decades ahead.' Like others who dream of a revitalised north which is no longer on the periphery, but an integrated part of Europe, he accepts that its future depends largely on what happens beyond the Baltic shores. A more assertively nationalistic Russia could jeopardise the first tentative moves to Baltic integration. A westward-looking Russia, by contrast, would play a vital part in the re-emergence of northern Europe. Above all, it would stimulate the full development of St Petersburg as that window on the west decreed by Peter the Great in 1703, when he ordered Italian architects to build a granite city on the frozen marshland won from Sweden at the battle of Poltava. With nine different languages, no obvious central core, a variety of religions and cultures and the lack of any common identity, it is doubtful whether the states which border the Baltic will ever create over-arching political institutions. 'Historically the peoples round the Baltic have seen themselves as being part of a common area,' explains Mr Ivo Iliste, head of the Swedish based Baltic Institute. 'Outer forces, particularly Russia, have made them realise there may be a point in coming together.' Thus far Baltic history has been more a struggle for supremacy than co-operation, as Sweden, followed by Russia and Germany, sought hegemony over the disparate countries of the region. 'The area has been the recipient not the creator of civilising influences,' says Professor David Kirby of London University. The Baltic region idea remains 'flimsy,' with 'many interests pulling against it,' but a 'flexible Baltic identity' could emerge, he believes. The re-unification of Germany means that the most powerful economy in Europe is now back with a more solid presence in the western Baltic. Once the economy of the five eastern Lander recovers, and Berlin resumes its full role as Germany's capital, the Baltic ports which traditionally handled trade from this region, including those such as Szczecin and Gdansk, which are now in Poland, will benefit from renewed prosperity in their German as well as wider central European hinterland. Such a prospect inevitably invites comparison with the Hanseatic League, which stimulated Baltic trading from the 13th century on. Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's executive chairman and Mr Bjorn Engholm, Schleswig Holstein's Social Democratic prime minister, have spoken up enthusiastically for a revival. Meanwhile, the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, have already established a Baltic Assembly - and the Nordic countries all belong to the loosely organised Nordic Council. But these are not embryonic supranational bodies with wide powers and responsibilities. Last March, in Copenhagen, a Council of the Baltic Sea States was established by Danish-German initiative as a regional forum to intensify co-operation and co-ordination based on free market principles and commitment to democratic institutions. Its initial declaration points to a range of issues for co-operation including economic and technological assistance, environmental protection, transport developments and cultural, educational and tourist exchanges. But the Council lacks a secretariat or an office and is very much inter-governmental. Other tentative organisations are emerging. Chambers of commerce have established a common body. So have the Baltic ports. The universities of the area are developing exchanges and scholarships. Cultural contacts are growing. But economic convergence over the Baltic area looks as if it will take a long time. The transition from the Soviet command economy to the free market on the eastern side of the Baltic will be painful and slow. A variety of international and bilateral assistance is being provided at government level, but so far western private companies have been more cautious. The Nordic recession has meant leaner times at home, and greater reluctance to develop corporate strategies in the Baltic area without credit guarantees. In the longer term, however, many manufacturing companies - faced with high labour and other costs in Scandinavia and Germany - are likely to invest in low-cost production plants close to the southern and eastern shores of the Baltic in preference to southern Europe or distant Asia. Over the last two traumatic years the foreign trade of Russia and the newly independent Baltic states has actually declined. But all three Baltic states are re-orientating their economies and trade westward. Longer term, the reconstruction of European Russia, especially the greater St Petersburg region, should revive the cross-Baltic trade which flourished before the first world war as Russia industrialised and urbanised at full speed. Much depends on long term infrastructure projects such as the proposed Via Baltica which would plug both sides of the Baltic into the European motorway network and stimulate the economic development of the Baltic hinterland. Modernising the ports like Kaliningrad, Gdansk, Riga, Tallinn and St Petersburg to take fuller advantage of low cost sea transport is also a priority. Environmental concerns demand prompt action to clean up the heavily polluted Baltic and the air contaminated by the heavy industries of the former communist states. Nordic technology is already helping to repair nuclear power stations in the east. At present, however, turning dreams into reality is hard. This winter north west Russia and the Baltic states are struggling to maintain energy and food supplies. Anxieties remain over the continuing Russian military presence in the Baltic states and Kaliningrad. Discriminatory nationality laws in Estonia and Latvia threaten to stir up ethnic tensions as Russians feel they are treated as second class citizens. Politically, the re-emergence of a vibrant Baltic region could help Poland, together with Hungary and Czechoslovakia, to speed up entry into the EC behind the Nordic states, whose expected entry, by 1995, will help tilt the balance of economic power and influence in the Community northwards. But Professor John Hiden and Patrick Salmon warn in their recent book, The Baltic Nations and Europe, that the lessons of history suggest the need for caution. Efforts to translate pan-Baltic dreams into reality between the first and second world wars were a 'gloomy story of mutual mistrust and frustrated hopes,' they write. This time such a denouement may be avoided. Mutual self-interest, backed by the Helsinki accords on cooperation and security in Europe. argues for the emergence of a new region of economic prosperity and political co-operation to replace the rivalries of the past. FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (8): The money rolls in - Capitalist world offers a helping hand. THE ULTIMATE success of the emerging Baltic region will depend on how fast the former Soviet countries on its eastern shores can become market economies. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are beginning to win support from international financial institutions. Its scale does not compare with the post-war Marshall Plan, but any help is better than none. The most important intervention comes from the Washington-based International Monetary Fund. This autumn the IMF approved stand-by credit arrangements for all three Baltic states. Latvia was allotted Dollars 82m over the next 12 months to back its economic and financial reform programme drawn up under the IMF's direction. It aims to liberalise prices and trade; to accelerate privatisation of the defunct state-owned sector; and to reduce inflation by June next year to a bearable level. The IMF realises that this coincides with a sharp contraction of Latvia's trade with Russia and a rise in the cost of its energy and raw materials. In Estonia the IMF is providing Dollars 41m of stand-by credits for the next 12 months. Estonia's reform programme has been set specific targets - to limit the fall in industrial output by July 1993 to 15 per cent; slow the annual inflation rate to 6 per cent by the end of the period; and raise gross foreign reserves by mid-1993 to a level equivalent to more than two months of imports. Estonia's adoption in July of the convertible kroon as its sole currency suggests that it stands a better chance of progress towards a free market economy than its Baltic neighbours. Lithuania has been awarded Dollars 82m worth of IMF stand-by credits - the decision was confirmed only days before the election of the former Communists back to power. The IMF aim in Lithuania is to reduce inflation to 2 per cent by next July and keep the fall in real GDP to about 22 per cent for the 12 month period. The World Bank is also providing loans and credit guarantees to finance urgently needed imports and technical help. This autumn it earmarked Dollars 30m for Estonia, with Lithuania and Latvia getting Dollars 60m and Dollars 45m respectively. In Estonia Dollars 29m will fund imports for the energy, agriculture, transport and health sectors (Dollars 7m will cover imported drugs, vaccines and other medical goods). A large part of Latvia's loan will help assure heating and electricity this winter with the help of imported fuel oil. Lithuania's loan will also support energy and medical services and pay for imported feed grain, protein meal, packaging and chemicals for the dairy industry. All three World Bank loans are expected to be co-financed by the Export-Import Bank of Japan to an amount yet to be determined out of the total World Bank package for the Baltic. Sweden is also providing aid to Latvia and Lithuania while Finland is providing a grant to help train local experts to carry out the technical work involved in administering these loans. This is only the start of the World Bank's involvement in the Baltic. It will soon open an office in Riga to co-ordinate its activities in the region. It intends to provide a safety net to ease the social pains of economic transition; build up a core of mamagement to run a market based economy; and promote medium-term investments to improve efficiency and protect the environment, particularly in the energy sector. In October the London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development agreed to invest Ecu1.5m in the Estonian Investment Bank. This represents a third of the Estonian bank's capital. This is the first equity investment made by the EBRD anywhere in central and eastern Europe. Similar developments can be expected in the other two Baltic states. The EBRD has also approved a number of technical cooperation projects in the Baltic states. These are mainly concerned with preparing plans for the long-term restructuring of the energy sector. A total of Ecu1.8m has been allocated for this purpose in Estonia with Ecu1.7m for a similar project in Lithuania and Ecu1.5m in Latvia. But consultants have to be selected for these plans. The European Community itself is also involved in providing direct financial assistance. This year Estonia received Ecu10m under the Community's Phare programme to help in privatisation, private sector development and financial reform, social securtity and gathering statistics. Supplies of wheat for making bread, barley, wheat flour and sugar have also been sold with the proceeds going into social welfare provision. Emergency investment is also being considered. A total of Ecu43.4m would help to repair Estonia's energy supply and reduce emissions from power stations and district heating plalnts, finance emergency oil import facilities and reduce demands for oil and gas. Similar programmes in Latvia and Lithuania are to receive Ecu37.060m and Ecu 43.100m respectively. In March, the Nordic countries agreed to create a Baltic Investment Programme with Ecu75m to develop the private sector in the Baltic states initially over the next three years. The strategy will be monitored by a Nordic Baltic investment committee. The Helsinki-based Nordic Investment Bank is also playing an active role in financing projects in the Baltic states. Last month it granted its first loan worth Ecu4.5m to Estonia to help develop small and medium-sized enterprises. The funds are being channelled through the recently established Estonian Investment Bank in Tallinn which will be responsible for the allocation of those funds. This first Baltic Investment Loan was granted within the framework of a new Ecu30m loan facility entrusted to the NIB to administer with the Nordic countries fully guaranteeing the loans. Mr Ulf Hindstrom, the NIB's vice president, claims there is already a great deal of interest with 60 projects already in the pipeline. The NIB has been entrusted with a Ecu5m three-year fund for technical aid to the investment banks in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. This will provide support for management and institutional activities The Helsinki based Nordic Project Fund - established in 1982 to help Nordic private companies in international activities - is also backing studies in the Baltic countries through an Ecu5m fund for technical assistance. This fund is to be administered by the EBRD and no project must exceed FIM700,000 with conditional interest-free loans covering 60 per cent of the cost.
19930623000000000	FT  23 JUN 93 / Estonia proudly wears its kroon of thorns: The first ex-Soviet republic to dump the rouble and beat inflation - but at a price. AFTER a turbulent year when a handful of former Soviet republics has followed Estonia's lead, the small Baltic country has just marked the first anniversary of the introduction of its own currency, the kroon. Estonia, less than twelve months after achieving its independence, became the first state emerging from the Soviet empire to dump the plummeting rouble and issue its own money on June 20 1992. The Ukrainian coupon has lost its value even faster than the Russian rouble, but Estonia has succeeded in curbing inflation from more than 500 per cent a year last June to less than 30 per cent now. A World Bank report on Estonia predicts that inflation will stabilise at that level for the rest of 1993 and the International Monetary Fund is optimistic about prospects for future growth. The kroon has also maintained its peg of eight to the German D-Mark despite a doubling in prices since its introduction. This is not as remarkable an achievement as it might first appear: Estonia operates a currency board system, whereby every kroon in circulation is backed by foreign currency reserves, swollen by loans and aid from the west, and 11.3 tonnes of gold, retrieved from the pre-war independent republic's deposits in foreign central banks. Although state companies still receive large subsidies to delay the inevitable labour shake-out, the budget is in broad balance. The money supply is further limited by a healthy distrust among business and ordinary people of banks (three of the largest banks failed last November) so that the banking system plays only a small role in money creation. Inflation persists, however, as the money supply has been boosted by foreign aid and investment and because gross national product slumped by more than 20 per cent last year to about Dollars 1bn (Pounds 665m). With more money chasing fewer goods, prices have risen. The kroon's 'hard currency' status - viewed as a symbol akin to manhood by Estonia's inexperienced central bankers - comes at a price, however. Shops in the capital, Tallinn, stocked full of overpriced Scandinavian luxuries, testify to an import binge the economy can ill afford. Although trade has been redirected from east to west, with Finland overtaking Russia as Estonia's main trading partner last September, exports, which had grown explosively after the introduction of the convertible kroon, have recently fallen back. The trade account slid into a deficit of EKr83m (Pounds 4.2m) in April, even without counting the substantial natural gas imports through pipelines from Russia, which are difficult to measure. Estonia is also increasingly uncompetitive for foreign investment, on which its future development depends. Its main attraction, a relatively cheap, skilled workforce, has faded following a doubling in wages in dollar terms over the past year. The privatisation programme proceeds in fits and starts. An initial international tender of 38 large companies last November was aborted after allegations of incompetence at the privatisation agency. A second offer of 56 enterprises was made in May. Vouchers to be used in the purchase of smaller companies have been distributed. But only Dollars 8.6m of an estimated total of Dollars 500m of state assets due to be sold off have been transferred to the private sector, and the sale of land to foreigners is severely restricted.
19930713000000000	FT  13 JUL 93 / Personal View: Estonia draws up reformers' blueprint. Estonia has assumed the pioneer position among the post-Soviet republics in implementing political and economic reforms. This is due to a large extent to the political consensus among its citizens about the concept and pace of reforms, as well as the determination of its current leadership to carry them out. These reforms, started in 1989, were much accelerated after the country regained its independence following the attempted Moscow coup of 1991. A new democratic constitution was adopted in June 1992 and free parliamentary elections were held in September. This resulted in the formation of the majority centre-right coalition government. In order to isolate itself from the economic chaos and inflation affecting Russia and other post-Soviet republics, Estonia introduced in 1992 its own currency, the kroon, pegged to the German D-Mark, and a stabilisation programme. This was a great success. However, a severe drop in industrial production caused by disruptions in inter-republic trade is threatening to overwhelm the Estonian economy with bankruptcies and unemployment. To deal with the issue, the Estonian government has made restructuring and privatisation of state-owned enterprises its main task. So far, progress in privatising large enterprises has been slow, about 30 per cent of services and small enterprises have already been auctioned. This spring, the Estonian government elaborated and then adopted in June a new, comprehensive law to integrate and simplify privatisation. The re-establishment of independence was legitimised by claiming continuity with the prewar Republic of Estonia. In privatisation, this has meant a policy based on restitution of property lost in 1940 after the country was incorporated into the Soviet Union and on compensation for exploitation by the Soviets. To carry out the programme, an elaborate system of vouchers was instigated. The restitution scheme attracted more than 200,000 claims, of which about 15 per cent have been resolved. Where it has been impractical to return property in kind, compensation vouchers are issued to claimants. In addition, 'work contribution' vouchers are given out, based on years of work in Estonia between 1945 and 1991. These are interchangeable and can be used in the privatisation of housing, land, collective farm implements and state-owned enterprises, or redeemed for shares in the compensation fund. While the voucher system has been implemented, commercial sales of property are proceeding on a pilot basis, with the Estonian Privatisation Agency having already sold 30 large, state-owned enterprises. This success bodes well for Estonia because of the interest shown by foreign, mainly Scandinavian and German, investors. The aim of the new privatisation law is twofold. The first is to spell out the principles for the integration of these two aspects of privatisation policy: the use of citizen vouchers and commercial sales. A small percentage of shares, determined individually for each company, will be reserved for sale in exchange for citizen vouchers. The majority of shares will be sold for cash to strategic investors, in the tender for sale of 52 state-owned enterprises, announced in May. The second central issue of this law is the creation of the State Property Agency. This will combine separate small and large enterprise privatisation operations and include a restructuring unit which will assume authority over all state enterprises and direct efforts to prepare them for privatisation. Separate laws deal with the privatisation of housing, and of collective farms, three-quarters of which have been dismantled on the basis of resolved restitution claims or leases based on anticipated restitution. Another law creates a compensation fund, the shares of which can be obtained for vouchers. These laws create the legislative framework for privatisation and hopes are high for rapid progress. Estonia is ahead, not only of the post-Soviet republics but also of some east European countries, in its efforts to build a demo-cratic society and a free market economy. It has a democratic consensus on the direction of its reforms, a legitimate government, a sound currency, and a credible economic transformation and privatisation programme that aptly balances the needs of foreign investors with the desire for participation and a sense of justice of the local population. Fulfilment of its demonstrable promise could serve as a model to others in the former Soviet Union who have to travel the difficult and uncertain road of return from the communist system. The author was between March and May 1993 an adviser on privatisation to Liia Hanni, Estonia's deputy prime minister
19930927000000000	FT  27 SEP 93 / Estonia seeks to reform banking sector. ESTONIA is seeking to strengthen its reputation as the best performing former Soviet republic by reforming the banking system. A commercial bank law, being drafted for presentation before parliament in November, sets out higher capital requirements for new banks and stricter regulation of the Baltic state's infant financial sector. Initial capital requirements for a bank will go up to EKr25m (Dollars 1.9m) by next July, after rising from EKr6m to EKr15m earlier this year. The government hopes eventually to match the European norm of Ecu5m. Meanwhile reserve requirements on deposits, deemed too high at 10 per cent, will be decreased to free the banks' hands, according to Mr Andres Sutt, deputy head of banking supervision at the Bank of Estonia. The maximum exposure to one borrower is not being reduced from the current high level of 50 per cent of total capital. The steps follow an initial restructuring begun after a banking crisis last winter led to failures at three of the largest banks, which accounted for a third of the money supply. The national bank's regulatory arm reviewed licences and set higher operating standards. Of the 42 commercial banks at the start of the year, one has gone bankrupt, 10 have merged and eight were not given new licences. To further strengthen the sector, the Bank of Estonia has decided not to give new commercial licences this year. The government wanted to close half the banks in order to centralise scarce capital and temper the weak banks' penchant for risky lending, particularly in Russia. The banks are now being asked to redirect themselves to financing infrastructure work, recapitalisation at newly privatised state enterprises and to consumer operations. Tallinn Bank, one of the largest with EKr190m in total assets, plans to open the country's first automated teller machine next month and computerise capital transfers soon afterwards. The banks are gaining confidence. Lending rates are between 20 to 30 per cent a year, down from 100 per cent when Estonia began monetary reform by introducing its currency, the kroon, in June 1992. Estonia may have stemmed its economic decline. Local experts point to a flourishing private sector, which now makes up 40 per cent of the economy, and an export boom. Exports rose by some 50 per cent the first half of the year, mostly driven by trade with western countries, particularly Finland. The IMF expects exports with countries other than former Soviet Union states to hit Dollars 500m (Pounds 333m) this year, up from Dollars 50m in 1991 to Dollars 247m in 1992. 'Nobody could be more pleased. Estonia really has changed in one year,' says Mr Mart Laar, prime minister. He adds that he wants Estonia to be the first former Soviet republic to permit foreign ownership of land. Industrial output the first half of the year was 65.3 per cent of the 1992 level and real wages are not rising. But Estonia remains the darling of international lending institutions for its monetary and fiscal discipline: inflation was 0.7 per cent in August, the currency is stable and the budget is projected to remain in broad balance next year.
19931202000000000	FT  02 DEC 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Estonia's hot rock industry shows its age - The republic's oil shale sector faces severe cost problems. Large black mounds dot the flat landscape along the southern Gulf of Finland coast. These mountains of ash are sombre monuments to Estonia's oil shale industry and the environmental damage it has inflicted on the area over the past 70 years. Ecological questions are less peripheral than they were under Soviet rule, but the newly independent state is being forced to restructure its energy sector in the face of mounting economic costs. Thanks to oil shale, Estonia enjoys a measure of self-sufficiency rare among former Soviet republics. The fossil fuel covers half the country's energy needs, including all electricity demand, according to the International Monetary Fund. Worryingly, however, output has been falling - from the equivalent of 5m tonnes of oil in 1990 to 4.22m tonnes in 1992. The drop would be even more marked but for sustained electricity exports to Latvia. Age and inefficiency are the chief culprits at all three levels of production: mining, retorting and upgrading. Estonia's only natural resource, the oil-bearing rock, is mined at three open pits and two underground mines near Kohtla Jarve, an hour's drive east of Tallinn, the capital. Since the 1920s, plants have turned the fossil fuel source into liquid fuel and electricity by retorting, or heating, and then upgrading. Because of high costs, the mines are not extracting fast enough to meet demand. Imported explosives are too expensive, accounting for a full third of all costs associated with oil shale production. Little can be done about that, but the consultancy Arthur D. Little said in a recent study that costs could be reduced by buying new machinery and selecting mining sites more wisely. The retorting operations, using ancient gas-generators, also desperately need new equipment to improve efficiency. Normally, state-owed enterprises would be privatised to do this, but the retorts are not hot items. 'They're awful. Nobody will buy it,' says Mr Jaan Uustalu, of the Estonian ministry of economics. Instead the government plans to sell off subsidised divisions at two of the three chemical factories, such as the ammonia and urea producing operations, and keep profitable production of shale oil, the fuel product, in state hands for another ten to 15 years. Shale oil production at present fails to meet its profit potential, reckoned at around Dollars 60m a year, because the other divisions eat the money. Kivioli and Kohtla Jarve, the two plants, also face staff reductions. The larger Kohtla Jarve plant, with 3,500 employees, would ideally have to lay off half the employees to be profitable, according to Mr Uustalu. Kivioli is starting to move into the black after recently cutting its workforce from 2,500 to 1,100. The small plant's advantages are illustrative: it operates 400 tonne retorts, rather than the 1,000 tonne units used at Kohtla Jarve, to get better yields and higher quality of shale oil and to use less energy. The broader economic question, hotly debated in Estonia, revolves around price. Since spring producers have pressed for a rise in the state-set lump oil shale price, which is below cash flow minimums needed by the mines. The government did raise the price from EKr36 to EKr45 a tonne on October 21, but only after pressure from Eesti Energia, the state electricity company. Mr Uustalu estimates that, to reflect true cost, the price must go up to EKr65 per tonne. But the government fears this might stoke inflation. The latest increase electricity raised costs by some 27 per cent, compared with an inflation rate of just 5.6 per cent. The processing factories are also worried. Arthur D Little found Kivioli could afford to buy oil shale at prices up to EKr110.5 a tonne but Kohtla Jarve would be forced into bankruptcy if the price was set at EKr65 a tonne. At current low prices, however, the industry as a whole suffers. Declining output hurts lucrative exports: on the world market, shale oil fetches Dollars 75 a tonne, raised to Dollars 105 a tonne in Rotterdam by the inclusion of transport costs. More importantly, if mined and processed correctly, oil shale could help make up for the drop in Russian oil imports by supplying at least a quarter of domestic fuel needs, up from below 20 per cent today. Last year Finland helped the country through the tough winter with a 100,000-tonne delivery of heating oil, but Estonia needs a more fecund domestic fuel industry. Western governments are equally, if not more, worried about the high environmental cost. Oil shale mining has left a legacy of pollution around Kohtla Jarve with an estimated 350m tonnes of untreated water pumped out of the mines annually. The Purtse River is biologically dead and local bathers recount coming out of area streams covered with black ash. The large ash mounds are another a problem: they have a 10 per cent organic content, which slowly leaks out. Finland allotted FMr37.4m (Dollars 6.5m) last year to help ease environmental problems in Estonia, oil shale pollution chief among them. But no active cleaning operation is under way. 'Everyone's there looking at it and thinking about it. The hotels are happy", comments an Estonian government official. The last, less discussed, alternative would leave the oil shale in the ground until the price went up or a less costly way was found to develop Estonia's unique resource. But few in Tallinn can afford such patience.
19940203000000000	FT  03 FEB 94 / World Trade News: Resurgence in Finnish exports. Finnish exports to Russia, which crashed following the collapse of the Soviet Union, doubled last year as a surge in transit trade helped what officials in Helsinki hope will be the gradual rehabilitation of a trade relationship that was previously a mainstay of Finland's economy, Hugh Carnegy reports from Helsinki . Figures published showed a 100 per cent increase in exports to Russia to FM6.04bn (Pounds 700m) in 1993. Exports to Estonia were also up almost 110 per cent to FM1.9bn, helping to push up the share of Finnish exports bought by former Soviet territories to 6.2 per cent of the total, compared to a low of 4.3 per cent in 1992.
19940309000000000	FT  09 MAR 94 / Business and the Environment: East counts cost of a dirty legacy - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania face a big bill after 50 years of Soviet army sloppiness. The Soviet army may be withdrawing from eastern Europe but it has left behind an ecological mess. The bill for the clean-up operation will be staggering. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are currently sizing up the fallout from 50 years of sloppiness at more than 1,000 former Soviet military facilities. This legacy of Soviet rule, ranging from nuclear waste to water pollution, should keep policy planners and eco-businesses busy for years. Soviet pilots, for instance, would regularly dump jet fuel on the ground to minimise flying hours. At the Tapa military air base in Estonia, 16 sq km are polluted by jet fuel, 7m deep in some places. At most Soviet airfields in the Baltic region - as in east Germany and the Czech Republic - waste fuel, while not toxic, has seeped into the region's shallow natural groundwater reserves and raised purification costs. The World Bank has examined the damage at Latvia's Tukums air force base, and is considering funding clean-up programmes. Environment Canada, a government agency, has offered to train Latvians in site remediation and assessment. But institutional lenders have yet to commit substantial funds to clean-up efforts. Meanwhile Baltec, a private Latvian company, has begun a bioremediation project at Tukums. Over five years, it plans to pump out the jet fuel, some of which can be salvaged and resold, and put bacteria into the soil to break down the remaining fuel. Inspectors previously barred from secret sites are finding other and more worrying surprises. Near Zvarde, an eastern Latvian town, more than 24,000 ha of farmland were confiscated for air target practice. The land was returned to Latvia after independence, leaving a trail of pollution, deforestation and unexploded bombs after 30 years of daily bombing sorties. Peteris Elfers, a member of parliament, estimates that demining might take another 30 years. 'It has to be done,' he says, 'but we don't have the technology to do it well.' An inspection last summer found 364 bombs, mines and rockets after examining just the main bombing polygon of 159 ha - and only cursorily to a depth of 20 cm. Deadly waste understandably raises more eyebrows. In Sillamae, a closed military city on Estonia's north-eastern coast, a classified chemical combine has left a 20m-high dam that contains, according to Murray Feshbach, an expert on the Soviet environment at Georgetown University in the US, 4m tonnes of uranium ore, 1,200 tonnes of pure uranium, 1,000 tonnes of radium, 800 tonnes of thorium, plus 2m tonnes of calcium sulphide oil shale ash and some ground radioactivity. In a big storm, this could go into the nearby Gulf of Finland and directly affect the Baltic rim countries. Feshbach says one safety measure, so far not carried out, would be to encase the dam in cement. Nuclear waste pockets have also been discovered across the Baltic hinterlands. Last summer in Lithuania, radioactive equipment dumped at a landfill in Zokniai, an airfield near Siulinae, produced alarming geiger readings. Paldiski, a big submarine base in Estonia, has two nuclear reactors, a depository for liquid waste, another for solid waste and underground pipelines for radioactive sewage. In troop withdrawal talks, Russia has agreed to give up the base, remove the nuclear fuel rods and take care of waste and the necessary clean-up. What should be done with the 600 tonnes of liquid waste and the two reactors is unclear. Estonia, which has a fiercely nationalistic government, worries about the proposed length of a Russian clean-up presence until 2000. It may look west for help instead, says Alar Olljum, a foreign ministry spokesman. But Feshbach worries more about dimethylhydrazine, also called heptyl, a liquid rocket fuel that is supertoxic, volatile, carcinogenic and nerve paralysing. Around 270 tonnes - of the estimated 150,000 tonnes in the former Soviet Union - have been found around Ventspils, a large Latvian port city. 'There is no known technology to get rid of it,' says Feshbach. 'The cheapest way is to fire it from rockets.' However, Harry Whitacker, chief of emergency engineering at Environment Canada, hopes heptyl can be turned into ammonia or methanol by using ultraviolet light and peroxide in an advanced oxidation process; and nitric acid, once pumped to the surface, could be converted to fertiliser if mixed with ammonium and hydroxide. On the Baltic Sea shore, military harbours have been left in a pitiable state. At Liepaja, a top Soviet Baltic Fleet base, the harbour floor, polluted by heavy metals and crude oil a metre deep, needs to be dredged. Just off the coast sit sunken battleship hulls, stripped of non-ferrous iron. Nearby are submarines which used batteries leaving semi-toxic residue  -potentially dangerous if built up over time. Clean-up would be expensive, but a World Bank official says the spectacular site of pilfered Soviet warships might be a profitable tourist site. The bank has made the conversion of Liepaja from a military into a commercial centre a priority project in the belief that the city's large port could be a key trans-shipment point to and from the Russian market. The bank has obtained the Latvian government's commitment to support a project of water treatment, coastal management and tourism. Environment Canada would handle the military pollution. Like any economically depressed nation, however, Latvia must make hard choices on pollution clean-up. A clear economic incentive is needed to secure funding. Symbolic cost estimates have been presented to Russia, the inheritor of the Soviet army. Latvia has sent Moscow a Dollars 147m (Pounds 99m) bill for land use and anticipated clean-up. Realistically, however, the Balts do not expect Russia to pay.
19940419000000000	FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (2): Key facts. ----------------------------------------------------------------------  -Estonia, officially the Estonian Republic, (land area 45,200 sq km) was taken over by the former Soviet Union in 1940, but regained its independence in 1991. Germany briefly held the region in World War Two. Capital: Tallinn.  -Population: 1.6m of which around 35% are ethnic Russians or other former Soviet nationalities, life expectancy at birth: 69.5 years.  -Politics: Isamaa (Fatherland Alliance) is the majority partner in the ruling coalition.  -The head of state, president Lennart Meri, was elected by the Riigikogu (state assembly) in October 1992 after direct elections failed to produce a candidate with a majority of the vote.  -The Estonian language belongs to the Baltic-Finnic branch of the Finno-Ugric languages.  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Economy  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Basically industrial, but agriculture is important; now moving out of recession.  -Most important mineral: oil shale. Large reserves of peat and high-quality phosphorites, limestone and dolomites.  -Estonia is noted for its textiles, paper, furniture and other forest products. Woodworking is a traditional and important industry. Reforestation policies are succeeding. Farming is difficult in some areas due to large glacial stones.  -GDP in 1993: +3%; forecast to rise 4-5% in 1994.  -Inflation 1993 (CPI): 35.6%.  -Currency: Estonian Kroon; exchange rate fixed since June 20, 1992 at EEK 8=DM1; (pounds 1 Stg = EEK 20.8: USdollars 1 = EEK 13.97).  -Gold and currency reserves at end-December 1993: EEK 5,237m (dollars 376m).  -Broad money supply (Nov 1993) EEK 5,589m. Balanced budget planned for 1994. Government incomce EEK 5,692m.  -Central government spending: EEK 4,674m (remainder by local authorities).  -Registered unemployent (end-1993): 1.74%  -Foreign trade (first nine months of 1993): exports EEK 7,143m (up 218%, compared to previous nine months); imports EEK 7,515m (up 240%).  -Trade deficit: EEK 372m.  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (16): Grim legacy has surprise benefits - Soviet planners' efforts to exploit shale have boosted energy supplies. On a snowy winter day, the neat wooden houses of Kivioli village seem picturesque - until you sniff the acrid air and remember the ecological horror visited on the once fertile lowlands of north-eastern Estonia. By the laws of market economics and in the light of environmental common sense, the layer of shale which underlies the entire region should have been left where modern man found it - a few metres below the ground. The commercial and human cost of extracting the black, stony mess created by algae 450m years ago is surely far greater than the value of the oil, bitumen and other chemicals which the shale contains. But Soviet planners did not see things that way, and their determination to extract, process and exploit almost anything at almost any price has had a happy side-effect. Where most of the former Soviet republics depend on Russia for their energy, and are therefore acutely vulnerable to political and economic pressure from Moscow, Estonia can satisfy all its electricity needs - and 65 per cent of its total energy requirements - from domestic sources. At Kivioli and two other quarries, plus six deeper mines, 14m tonnes of shale is extracted a year. 'If we were starting from scratch, nobody would mine shale on this scale. But since we have inherited the machinery and plant, it makes sense to continue,' says Mr Leonid Talko, director of the open-cast works at Kivioli. His excavators have already covered an area of 6 kms by 2 kms, and mining is expected to continue for another 15 years; Estonia's entire shale reserves could last for another century. The sharp-smelling air is caused not by the mining itself so much as the coking plant next door. In addition to extracting oil, it produces bitumen, formalins, and a host of industrial chemicals as well as turning out - in a unique use of shale - consumer products such as shampoo and detergents. While the mountains of stone thrown up by mining can be reforested with success, the tips of waste left by coking are disastrous. Their deadly cocktail of phenols and benzofurans will, if left untreated, seep steadily into Estonia's ground water. With oil accounting for about 20 per cent of the shale by volume, that means that Mr Talko is being paid a meagre Dollars 20 per tonne of petroleum equivalent. Electricity is sold to the consumer at less than 2 US cents per kilowatt-hour. If the necessary grid were constructed, Estonia could make a handsome profit by exporting power to Sweden and Finland. In Soviet times, the republic was at one point sending 60 per cent of its electricity output to Russia and Latvia; now recession in those countries has reduced that business to a fraction. Estonia's energy planners aim to take maximum advantage of the republic's self-sufficiency in power while minimising dependence on Russia in liquid fuels and gas. In January, Estonian companies which buy fuel oil from Russia reported that they were finding it harder and harder to get supplies; and the national power utility, Eesti Energia, acknowledged that only 30 per cent of its tanks were full. To balance the effects of this, the authorities are battling to reverse the profligate energy consumption habits of the Soviet period - when gas entering Estonia was not even metered and homes and factories were poorly insulated. The cost to consumers of imported gas and fuel oil has been raised sharply, while the use of peat and wood-burning plants for urban heating systems has been encouraged. At Kivioli, Mr Talko - a Ukrainian with a brisk, competent manner - is the first to acknowledge that proper husbandry of Estonia's energy resources will not be accomplished overnight. He points with a shudder to the flimsy window frames of his office, a poor defence against the icy winds outside, and asks: 'How is anyone supposed to heat a room like this?' FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (15): Farmers bring home the bacon - Agriculture / At first glance, Estonia's agricultural statistics seem to tell a story of disaster. Yet the sector is recovering steadily from the shock of Soviet collapse, and it is already contributing substantially to the republic's economic turnround. Estonia's hardy, practical folk have always been first-rate farmers. In the 1930s, the country foreshadowed the post-war success of Denmark as an agricultural exporter; its seed potatoes were admired all over Europe, and its bacon and eggs were sold in every city from London to Leningrad. Under the Communist system, too, Estonia was an important supplier of meat and dairy products to Russia. Its agronomists prided themselves on keeping in touch, through their contacts in Scandinavia, with all the developments in agricultural technology; and it is still hard to convince them that they have something to learn from western Europe about growing potatoes. Collective farms in the smallest Soviet republic carved out a formidable reputation as purveyors of farming skills to the rest of the Union. Compared with other Soviet regions where nature had been much kinder, the Estonians' use of fertiliser was far more efficient and their veterinary knowledge outstanding. The Danish-built slaughter-house at Rakvere, capable of handling 800 cows a day, meets the highest international standards, as does the dairy products factory at Viru. All this should have left Estonia better equipped to face the brave new capitalist world than most parts of the former communist empire. But the economic disintegration of the Union - and the breakdown of virtually all agricultural trade with Russia - was, at least in the short term, a body blow. It was not so much the loss of revenue from Russia, which was modest enough, as the instant creation of a huge mountain of surplus farm produce which depressed prices on the internal market. The livestock industry, traditionally dependent on Russian fodder, was only saved from collapse by free deliveries of western feed-grain. From Estonia's point of view, the ideal solution to the crisis would be a steady increase in agricultural sales to the West. Farm goods already account for more than 20 per cent of total exports, more than any other single sector, and quality control and packaging are more and more closely aligned with western requirements. But Scandinavia and western Europe are, of course, brimming with their own, heavily subsidised farm output. Indeed, Finland effectively dumps on Estonia a significant slice of its domestic farm surplus, which is duly bought in the shops of Tallinn by bargain-hunting tourists from Helsinki. So Estonian farmers will have need to be even more canny than usual if they are to secure a firm niche in the west. Output of some of Estonia's key products has plunged since independence. Milk production is projected at 600,000 tonnes this year, down from 1m in 1991, and the grain harvest is forecast at no more than 550,000 tonnes, down from 940,000 three years ago. Last year, farm gate prices in both those sectors were barely half the international level. Only now is the market tightening to the point where makers of high-quality cheese are finding it difficult to obtain milk of the right grade. Western experts see specialist meat and dairy products - blood sausage, gourmet cheeses, milk powder - as providing Estonia's best hope of gaining a long-term foothold in overseas markets. The export of live animals to the Middle East, notably sheep to Syria, is another lucrative business. 'About one-third of our farmers have already adapted their thinking to the market-place,' says Mr Ants Laansalu, a senior official at the agriculture ministry. 'Some of the remainder still believe in production for its own sake. But they will gradually adapt.' Yet two question marks hang over the future of Estonian farming. One is the structure of ownership: how fully and how soon Estonia will switch from the agricultural collectives of the communist system to reliance on the family farms which seems to be in the blood of every Estonian? There is a universal consensus on the desirability of reverting to private farming, and of restoring as far as possible the title deeds of pre-war farmers and their descendants. The legal procedures by which former owners can reclaim their land do exist, although they are in need of refinement. And yet the privatisation process has been curiously slow. In Soviet times, Estonia had about 350 large farms, either state-owned or collective. After two and a half years of independence, the proportion of land farmed privately is still only 14 per cent, while the 'socialist sector' has undergone a very limited break-up into about 1,000 co-operatives and public companies. No one denies the difficulties in the way of privatisation. Many pre-war family farms have been gobbled up by expansion in forestry, and some have been divided between collective institutions. Most pre-war farming families will no longer want to work the land themselves; and the interests of current users must also be secured. The average pre-war small-holding, at 25 hectares, would not be economic in today's conditions. Many of them consist of narrow strips - measuring, say, 30 metres by 1,000 - which were sliced out of German baronial estates in the 1920s. By now, the strips have been merged into huge fields, and it would make little economic sense to divide them up again. And yet the consensus among experts is that, given the political will, all these difficulties can be overcome. Since the the pre-war land registries are intact, it should be possible to identify pre-war farming families and invite them to choose between selling or renting to the state or current users. There is a mystery as to why this has not happened. The other question mark concerns sales to Russia, which are of course linked to the wider issue of relations with the eastern neighbour. The absence of an inter-governmental trade agreement with Russia rules out any revival of the old state-to-state arrangements; but with capitalism flourishing in both countries, it ought to be possible to revive the old trade on a strictly private sector basis. There are two questions in the minds of Estonian officialdom: is the Russian government willing to give Estonia the economic shot in the arm which reviving the farm trade would mean? And if not, can it actually stop Russian businessmen from importing Estonian produce if they want to? Estonian eggs have returned to the St Petersburg market, and Russian tariff barriers on Estonian fish have failed to disrupt that trade. But many Estonians fear that if the cross-border trade in meat and dairy products shows signs of reviving, Russia will immediately erect more tariff barriers, for reasons that are as much political as economic. As in every other sector of Estonian life, the influence of the Russian factor is an enigmatic one. And indeed, there are some suspicious minds who attribute the slowness of the privatisation process to the hidden hand of Moscow. And it is undoubtedly true that re-establishing Estonia's yeomanry on its ancestral lands would make the territory that bit harder to occupy. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (14): An acutely sensitive hot spot - In the Russian-speaking border town of Narva, where Slav and Nordic worlds meet, old resentments are never far below the surface. Travel to Narva from the west, and you will be struck by the grim monotony of the apartment buildings, by the paucity of decent shops cafes or anything else to relieve the dullness of the scene. But the sensations are quite different when you cross the Narove River and enter the town from Russia under the awesome shadow of a white medieval tower which for centuries was the outmost bastion of Nordic power. Compared with the adjacent bits of Russia, the pavements look cleaner, the roads better maintained; and the visitor is grateful for a restaurant that can serve up a tasty enough version of steak, egg and chips, and would not disgrace a depressed Belgian mining town. Narva has often been a nodal point between the Slav and Nordic worlds. In 1700, Peter the Great suffered a humiliating blow when the army he sent to the town was routed - it was this defeat which spurred him to wrest the whole Baltic region from the Swedes. Today, the town is once again an acutely sensitive spot, for there is nowhere else in independent Estonia which has such a high concentration of ethnic Russians. Barely 3,000 of the 82,500 townspeople are of Estonian origin. And if relations between the Estonian authorities and the Russian-speaking community should ever break down irretrievably, this is where the break will come. Just over the river - and the border - lies the Russian fortress town of Ivangorod, which in Soviet times formed a single conurbation with Narva. Because it views itself as legal successor to all the territory of the pre-war republic, Estonia formerly asserts sovereignty over Ivangorod. And there are hotheads in Russia who also want to re-unite the towns - by taking Narva back. So Narva is the place where Estonia's biggest internal problem can be seen in sharpest relief. Since language skills have been made a criterion of Estonian citizenship, more than 400,000 of the republic's inhabitants have failed to quality for passports. Essentially, these people are Soviet-era immigrants brought to the Republic by the Communist regime as soldiers or workers in new industries. They are the reason why the ethnic Estonians share of the republic's population has fallen from 88 per cent in 1940 to just over 60 per cent today. And 'immigrants' and their families form the overwhelming majority of the population of Narva, where only 12 per cent of residents have qualified for Estonian passports. Although Estonia has convinced several pan-European bodies that its laws do not violate human rights, the de facto situation is a peculiar and potentially dangerous one. About one Estonian resident in three can complain that he is subject to 'taxation without representation.' The non-citizens are agents in the Estonian economy - as tax payers or social benefit collectors - and subject to Estonian law, but they have no input into Estonian policy. For many members of the minority, discontent over their legal status is assuaged by relative material well-being. A Russian factory worker in Tallinn is still better off than his counterpart in St. Petersburg - but that factor hardly applies in Narva. One in three residents is a pensioner, relying on an income that is barely above the poverty line. And Narva's factories, once show pieces of Soviet industry, are in difficulty. The sensitive Baltiits, which makes equipment for handling uranium, has work for barely 1,000 of its 5,000 employees. Its best hope probably lies in marketing high technology medical apparatus. Less than half the 12,500 workers at Kreenholm, a giant textile factory, are gainfully employed. It has become virtually impossible to procure the basic raw material, cotton from central Asia, for the simple reason that it gets stolen on the way through Russia. After dipping into insolvency, Narova, a furniture factory, is struggling back on to its feet, thanks to partners in Israel and new customers in Hong Kong. But its chairman, Mr. Valery Myachin, says it has been an uphill struggle to wean his 1,500 employees off the Soviet habit of production for production's sake. Political tension came to a head last summer when the Estonian parliament passed a law requiring all inhabitants to apply for citizenship or residents permits, a move that appear to mean expulsion for those who failed to qualify for either. In a stinging rebuke, President Yeltsin accused the Tallinn authorities of practising 'ethnic cleansing' and apartheid. He warned that they would bear the 'entire responsibility' for any breach of public order. His adviser, Mr. Sergei Stankevich, went even further: he warned that the Russian minority would reserve the option of 'self determination' if its rights were trampled upon. Translated out of Soviet language, these threats were clear enough unless Estonia was a little kinder to its Russians, Moscow might sponsor a local 'independence' movement within Estonian territory which could tear the Republic apart - that is exactly what Moscow has done in Georgia and Moldova, with tragic results. In both those cases, Moscow made the calculation - correctly - that the Republic authorities would over-react to the situation. So the challenge for the Estonian government is how to avoid falling into the same trap. Events appeared to be moving in an ominously familiar direction last year when pro-Russian politicians defied Tallinn and staged a referendum on 'autonomy' for the town. And organisers claimed that over half the adult population passed ballots; the Estonian authorities - who urged residents not to vote but did not physically prevent them - dismissed this figure as an exaggeration. Tension in Narva has eased since it became clear that most ethnic Russians in Estonia will, in practice, receive residents permits for another five years. Another stabilising factor was the outcome of last October's fighting in Moscow, and the defeat of the 'parliamentary' forces which had always been keen sponsors of the most militant factions in Narva. But resentment is never far below the surface. Estonian law allows resident aliens to vote in local elections, but not national ones. And even in local ballots, only citizens may stand for office. So Narva's old town council, elected under Soviet procedures, has recently been replaced by a new municipal authority in which the key figures are Estonian or at least pro-Estonian. The new authority maintains that its predecessors and their friends in local industry, deliberately turned away foreign investment proposals because economic discontent suited their political book. 'The old leadership wanted social tension, so they could call meetings in the central square and whip up false rumours,' says Mr. Ants Liinets, the Municipal Secretary. 'It was easier for them to do that when the local economy was in serious difficulty.' The challenge for the new administration is to boost local living standards to the point when the populace no longer provides tinder-dry material for Russian nationalist firebrands - from the town or further afield. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (17): A nation of talented innovators - Bruce Clark highlights Estonia's inventive tradition and creative flair. Estonians make good inventors. The small Estonian community in Sweden has produced several talented innovators and Estonia's Johannes Hint - whose efforts were rewarded with a criminal case and a grisly death in prison - had one of the most original scientific minds in the former Soviet Union. Mr Toom Pungas is another standard-bearer of Estonia's inventing tradition. A florid, genial figure whose looks reflect the Estonian farming stock from which he springs, Mr Pungas rose to considerable prominence in the Soviet scientific world. In the 1980s, Moscow put him in charge of a sensitive government project seeking to reduce - from a staggering seven years - the average time lag between scientific discoveries and their application in Soviet industry. He was successful enough to make some bitter enemies, notably bureaucrats in Moscow industrial ministries with a vested interest in maintaining the time lag. He has now returned to his native Estonia where he heads the local Inventors' Union and campaigns vigorously for the adoption of tough patent laws. While his work in Moscow involved pioneering technology in fields such as lasers and compact discs, Mr Pungas is engaged in the more homely task of restoring the 60-hectare family farm where he grew up. He believes he has found a way to bring his ancestral acres - ruined by noxious waste from the shale-oil industry - back to life, and solve a number of ecological problems. In a discovery for which he recently filed a US patent application, Mr Pungas has made an environmentally friendly fertiliser out of oil-shale waste, mixed with pigs slurry - another pollutant that is turning the Baltic into a dead sea - plus an activator produced by Medina, an American biotechnology company. The oil-shale tips, Mr Pungas points out, are a hazard which will need to be neutralised, anyway. His proposal is to create soil-enriching virtue out of a pollution-fighting necessity. The alkalinity of the oil-shale waste - micro-organisms cannot survive in it - is counterbalanced by the acidic pig slurry so the redolent mixture becomes an agency for restoring micro-organic life, as well as minerals, to the soil. The inventor reckons his fertiliser soil could be used by Middle Eastern states battling desertification and for reforestation in Scandinavia on soil damaged by chemical fertiliser and acid rain. After 'extremely positive' indications from tests on potatoes and tomatoes, he plans to go into production on a small scale - about 30,000 cubic metres - this year and hopes to capture a large chunk of Estonia's 3m ton per year market in fertiliser soil. But Mr Pungas is not counting any chickens, or fertiliser pellets, yet. Already, he says, he sees signs of 'negative reaction' to his project: samples disappearing, faxes going astray, production licences failing to materialise. He says he cannot tell whether this reflects the activity of commercial rivals, or of governments who fear the economic strength that pioneering a successful fertiliser project would give Estonia. But if Estonia's inventors are permitted, mixing shale waste and slurry will be the first of many ideas and the country's ability to convert these ideas into profitable production will be a test of its viability as a small but efficient outpost of capitalism. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (11): Ambitious renewal plans - Ice-free ports and new ships / Important developments are under way at deep-water ports of Tallinn, Muuga and Paldiski. Shortly after Peter the Great wrested control over the eastern Baltic from the Swedes at the start of the 18th century, the Russian Czar singled out three key sites for future port development - Paldiski and Tallinn in Estonia, and St Petersburg itself. For 50 years, Paldiski was a Soviet navy training base and, eventually, a nuclear submarine port, off limits to Estonians and tucked away behind sentries and double files of barbed wire. Now the doors and windows of Paldiski's bleak, Soviet-era, prison camp hang agape, a clutch of trawlers lies rusting at anchor, the barracks and buildings are gutted. On a bleak January afternoon, the last trucks loaded with ripped-out cables and anything else of value, were being loaded on to a grey naval transporter, the Donetsk Miner, before heading off to the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad, formerly Konigsburg. By mid-1994, the last of the dismantled training reactors will have been removed - and Paldiski, with its sheltered harbour and 9.5 metre draught, will be both liberated and potentially ripe for development as a commercial harbour or, given the area's natural beauty, a yacht basin and tourist complex. But the real focus of Estonia's maritime and entrepot enterprise are the ice-free, deep-water ports of Tallinn and nearby Muuga. The dry bulk, oil and container terminal now being extended and developed at Muuga, will cost Dollars 600m. The 18-metre draught ensures that Muuga, like Tallinn City Port with its 16.5-metre draught, is able to take every kind of vessels able to sail in the shallow Baltic. Neste, the Finnish oil company, has helped finance a 500,000-ton oil storage facility at Muuga while Japan's Sumitomo bank, as well as the World bank, the EBRD and other international financial institutions are involved in plans to build a 300,000 unit capacity container terminal, a coal export facility for the Russian trade and improved ro-ro and other facilities. St Petersburg, by comparison, is poorly equipped and much shallower as well as dangerously polluted and poorly guarded, Already a high proportion of Russian trade including mineral shipments by rail from as far afield as Kazakhstan, plus more than 70,000 Lada cars for export and other fragile, or vulnerable cargoes, are shipped through Tallinn. The harbours and the new Estonian shipping lines carved out of Morflot, the former all-union Soviet shipping company, are the main source of hard currency earnings. Taken together, the income from hard currency services - shipping, port services of all kinds and tourism - help to keep the current account in surplus. These activities form the basis for future development of a largely service-based economy for the capital city and its entrepot trade with the former Soviet states and the rest of the world. To this important extent, the real potential of Tallinn will only be reached when Russia itself is more prosperous and linked to foreign trade. Meanwhile, Tallinn is the home port for the Estonian Shipping Company (ESCO), which took over maritime assets left at the time of the Soviet dissolution. It has embarked on an ambitious renewal programme to update its current fleet of 73 vessels of 517,000 dwt capacity. Its inherited stock of general purpose ships, ro-ro vessels, timber carriers, bulk carriers and river-sea going ships have an average age of nearly 18 years. The company, due to be privatised by the end of 1996, carried 5.23m of the just over 11m tonnes of cargo which passed through Tallinn port complex, including the new port of Muuga, last year. Trade with Scandinavia generally is rising strongly, although the fastest rise in both passenger and freight traffic is on the short Tallinn-Helsinki run of only 80 kms, essentially a link in the mooted Via Baltica super-highway which will eventually connect Helsinki, and St Petersburg through the Baltic States to markets in central, southern and western Europe. With well over 2.3m passengers now passing through Tallinn every year, a new ferry terminal building will be ready for the start of the tourist season in May. Mr Peeter Palu, who was construction minister in the former communist-era government, remembers how all key jobs in both the port and the connecting transport services, as well as the bulk of manual grades, were effectively reserved for Soviet (meaning non-Estonian) citizens. 'Under market conditions the port is already being run very differently,' he says. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (10): Crucial political conundrum - Debate on civil rights of ethnic minorities. Restoration of the rights and liberties of the inter-war Estonian republic became the obsessive goal of all politically-aware Estonians - once glasnost, the great achievement of the Gorbachev era, made it possible, after nearly 50 years of silence - to debate the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop pact which transferred independent Estonia into the Soviet sphere of influence. Local reformist communist party leaders - men like Edgar Savisaar and Arnold Ruttel - took the lead and, in the summer of 1988, the Estonian Supreme Soviet became the first of the 15 Soviet national parliaments to declare national sovereignty. This was followed by the first free elections in March 1990 which brought openly pro-independence nationalists into the parliament and swept Mr Savisaar into power as prime minister. The government was always regarded as transitional but became even more so after the failed August 1991 coup in Moscow which was immediately seized upon as an occasion to declare full independence from Moscow and set up a constitutional assembly to draw up a new constitution. Communists and nationalists together started work on the new constitution in November 1991 and the new document, which rejected the authoritarian presidential model of the pre-war constitution in favour of parliamentary government, was approved by referendum in June 1992. The first elections under the new constitution took place in September 1992 and the pro patria, or Fatherland front, a loose alliance of conservative and Christian democrat groups, led by Mr Mart Laar, a young former academic, emerged as the largest single grouping with 23 seats in the 100-seat Riigikogu (parliament). Mr Laar became prime minister of the five-party conservative coalition government formed after the elections. He used his party's swing vote to break an inconclusive outcome to the presidential elections, which took place at the same time, and ensure the election of Mr Lennart Meri as the first president of the restored Estonian republic. Mr Meri, a well-known film-maker and historian, is the son of the foreign minister of the inter-war republic, and was among 100,000 prominent Estonians deported to Siberia after the Soviet takeover in 1940. He lacks the formal powers enjoyed by Konstantin Pats, the last pre-war president of Estonia, but enjoys high prestige as a canny observer of Russian affairs and elder statesman in a government whose ministers average age hovers around 30 years. Last year, President Meri obliged the government to revise its nationality laws to take into account objections of discrimination against Russians, voiced by the Council of Europe, and caused a flurry early this year when he protested against the January government re-shuffle which, he feared, would distract attention from the worrying signs of resurgent Russian nationalism and talk in Moscow of restoring Russian influence over the Baltic states. Given Estonia's recent history, and the colonial nature of Soviet dominance throughout the Baltic states, a crucial political conundrum concerns the civil rights of ethnic minorities, mainly Russian speakers, who make up 35 per cent of the population. All the current members of parliament are ethnic Estonians. Automatic citizenship, and therefore full rights to vote and participate in politics, is limited to those whose families were resident before the waves of Soviet-inspired immigration after 1940. Non-citizens were able to vote in local elections last year, but were not eligible to stand as candidates for election. More than half the population of Tallinn, and over 90 per cent of the inhabitants of Narva, the eastern border city, are Russian speakers and over 10,000 former Soviet army and KGB officers have set up their retirement homes in the republic. The latter in particular are openly viewed as a potential fifth column by many Estonians, including ministers. The government offers to help defray the removal expenses of non-Estonians wishing to leave and an estimated 30,000, plus thousands of Soviet military personnel and their families, have left over the last 18 months. Most Russian-speakers, including an estimated 80-100,000 'old Russians' from Czarist days, want to stay in what is expected to become a stable and prosperous democracy. They have been granted residence permits for the next five years and the offer of citizenship conditional on learning basic language skills and demonstrating loyalty to the Estonian state. Dual citizenship is not allowed. Acute observers like Mrs Marju Lauristin, the minister of social affairs, notes that 90 per cent of Russian speaking children, hitherto segregated into Russian speaking schools, are now seriously studying the Estonian language - 'for Estonians the issue is not blood, but the survival of their language and culture,' she underlines. Mrs Lauristin is a social democrat in a government whose overall conservative philosophy is deeply influenced by Thatcherite notions of self-reliance and the virtues of thrift and hard work. Taxation and other policies are expressly aimed at encouraging the emergence of a large, stable, property-owning middle class, concentrating social assistance on the really poor and introducing self-financing health and pension schemes. For many, Estonia's determination to achieve the prosperity of its Scandinavian neighbours by the turn of the century is symbolised by the top priority given to first establishing and then sustaining a convertible, gold-backed, independent national currency. Significantly, plans for the new independent Kroon were first drawn up in 1987 when Mr Siim Kallas, the president of the Bank of Estonia, was not a banker but a member of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union working closely with the Russian reformers whose star is now waning in Russia itself. He saw that Soviet reforms would falter without serious monetary reform, doubted that Russia's reformers had the strength to push through what was required, but was convinced that Estonia alone could succeed. Two years of independence have proved him right. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (12): Shift in direction from east to west  -Foreign trade / Estonia's foreign trade more than doubled last year, but Russia remains an important partner, as Anthony Robinson reports here. When Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet president, sought vainly to keep Estonia and the other Baltic states within the Soviet Union he warned that divorce would cut the umbilical cord which kept Estonia supplied with energy and raw materials and lead to economic disaster. Nothing could have been further from the truth, although Mr Gorbachev almost certainly believed in what he was saying. Within two years Estonia has shifted from more than 90 per cent dependence on the Soviet market to around 30 per cent, including trade with its Baltic neighbours, Latvia and Lithuania which it is trying to boost through the Baltic free trade agreement. Russia remains an important trading partner with strong potential for rapid growth once this can be placed on an ordinary commercial basis. St Petersburg, with more than 9m inhabitants in the city and its surroundings, is a rich potential market for agricultural and industrial goods. Tallinn and other Estonian ports are well-placed to serve the expected growth of Russian foreign trade into the 21st century. Estonia's experience over the last three years demonstrates that a combination of political independence, a strong currency and a rational, market-determined price structure can lead to dramatic shifts in both the direction, volume and usefulness of foreign trade. In the specific Estonian case it has led both to a change in the pattern of trade, as energy and raw material consuming industries have been closed or cut back, and a geographical shift in trade from east to west. Both aspects have been helped greatly by the physical proximity of Finland, only 80kms across the Gulf of Finland, and the cultural and linguistic affinity between these two Finno-Ungaric peoples. Even so, the turnaround has been exceptional. In 1991, more than 56 per cent of Estonian exports - mainly foodstuffs, textiles, chemicals and machinery - went to Russia alone and over 90 per cent to the Soviet Union as a whole. Total dependence on Soviet oil and gas ensured a similar pattern of imports with Russia alone accounting for 46 per cent of imports. In 1993, Estonia's foreign trade more than doubled to around EEK20,000m (over Dollars 1,450m). Detailed figures for the first nine months show that exports, at EEK7,143m grew by 218 per cent compared to the same period in 1992 while imports grew 240 per cent to EEK7,515m, leaving a small negative balance of EEK372m. Further strong trade growth is expected as Estonia, with its excellent deepwater ports, resumes its old Hansa league trading habits and the economy expands. Given the small overall size of the economy, the biggest potential for growth lies in shipping services and the development of an already substantial entrepot trade. With a touch of irony, and some immodesty, the port of Tallinn likes to bill itself as the 'Hong Kong of the Baltic.' The move of Estonian exporters into new markets meanwhile will be facilitated by a series of new trade agreements. These started in July 1992 with the bi-lateral free trade agreements with Finland, Norway and Sweden. This was followed by the tri-lateral free trade agreement between Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in September 1993. This year, Estonia and the European Commission are due to discuss a free trade agreement with the EU, talks which will largely try to eliminate the possibly harmful consequences of Finland's own application for EU membership. For Estonia, close trade and investment links with Finland are vital. In 1993, Finland became both the main export market, taking 22 per cent of Estonian goods compared to Russia's 20 per cent, and the main source of supply, 25 per cent of total imports compared to the 19 per cent supplied by Russia. Sweden and Germany are the next most important trade partners.  ---------------------------------------         Value of foreign trade  --------------------------------------- Period              Exports    Imports                       EEKm.      EEKm.  --------------------------------------- 1991                    510        445 1992                  5,548       5127 1993, half year       4,295      4,452  --------------------------------------- FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (13): Light industry benefits from innovative drive. It seems a long time ago now, but back in the late 1980s, a man called Mikhail Gorbachev was struggling valiantly to shore up the Soviet economy. He gave enterprises more independence, in the hope they would behave like western ones, and encouraged them to seek help with re-tooling, particularly if they were makers of scarce consumer goods. In Russia, the old dogs of communist industry were reluctant to learn new tricks. Instead of making better consumer goods, they used their newfound freedom to splash out on western luxuries as a treat for their workers. But the Baltic states were a different story. By Soviet standards, they already had flourishing, innovative light industries - and they jumped at the opportunity Mr Gorbachev offered them. For this, at least, independent Estonia has reason to thank Mr Gorbachev. A typical beneficiary of the Gorbachev innovation drive is Baltika, a Tallinn company staking out a claim to be the region's leading garments maker. Three years of consultancy from the UK company Taylor Woodrow helped the 66-year-old business re-orient its production from the undemanding Soviet market to the more bracing atmosphere of Scandinavia. With average daily output of 1,000 jackets and blouses, 2,500 pairs of trousers, and wages of less than one fifth of the Scandinavian level, Baltika is a useful sub-contractor for middle-market European clothing chains such as Next and C & A. Baltika has two labels of its own - Plus B and Baltman - which it sells at five stores in Estonia and is now introducing them to Latvia and Lithuania. While Baltika's own brands accounted for just 20 per cent of output last year, the hope is to boost that figure to 50 per cent in 1994. Group turnover, including 13 wholly or partly-owned companies, is also seen rising impressively, to EEK 200m this year from EEK 135m in 1993. But profit margins in the embryonic Baltic market are relatively low (about 6 per cent last year) and as soon as it feels able, the company hopes to launch its own labels in western Europe. Another of Tallinn's light-industries is the HTM ski boot factory. Here, a foreign technology partner of several years' standing - the Austrian-Italian leisure goods consortium, HTM - took a 90 per cent share in the joint venture that was created last summer out of Salvo, an Estonian business that once made helmets and other plastic goods. With annual production of 400,000 pairs of ski boots, nearly 8 per cent of total world output, the Estonian plant expects to handle more and more of HTM's product range - including ski bindings and diving equipment. Neither Baltika nor HGM makes much use of local raw materials or equipment. Estonia may be full of ailing textile companies, but the quality is nowhere near Baltika's requirements and most of its fabric comes from western Europe. So, too, does the granulated plastic which is the basic raw material for HTM. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (8): The inflow accelerates - Foreign investment. Foreigners accounted for more than half the EEK2,540m (Dollars 195m) of new investment in the Estonian economy over the first nine months of 1993 with Finland and the Scandinavian countries in the lead. The inflow is expected to quicken in 1994 with the speeding up of privatisation and a possible 4-5 per cent rise in GDP. Investment mirrors the trade pattern. Over the first nine months of 1993, Finland - with EEK45.7m invested in 502 Estonian enterprises - topped the league followed by the US with EEK35.5m in 31 enterprises. US investors include PepsiCo, although the largest US investor is a company owned by Mrs Tivu Silves, an Estonian entrepreneur with subsidiaries in the US. Swedish companies, eager to secure a lower cost production base invested EEK31m in 94 enterprises although their presence is actually greater because many Swedish companies, including Asea Brown Boveri, operate through their Finnish subsidiaries. Italy comes fourth with EEK23m, but virtually all of that is accounted for by one big investment, the HTM Sport Estonia ski boot and accessory factory. Germany completes the list of the top five foreign investors with EEK12m in 35 companies while the bulk of the EEK8m invested by UK companies is accounted for by Shell, the oil company. Russian entrepreneurs invested EEK7.9m in 76 companies. Several big projects are in the pipeline however with Sumitomo Bank of Japan involved in financing the big new container and oil port at Muuga, just outside Tallinn. Other foreign investments include: A Dollars 10m investment by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in a Dollars 44m project to modernise and clean up the 1m tonne a year Kunda Nordic Cement plant. Kunda is jointly owned by the Estonian government and Atlas Nordic Cement, controlled by Euroc of Sweden and Switzerland's Holderbank. Modernisation of the telecommunications network, including a FMk100m mobile phone system and a ten-year Dollars 50m fixed line project for 600,000 lines. Joint venture between the Estonian government (51 per cent) and Telecoms Finland and Swedish Telea, with 24.5 per cent each. Electrolux of Sweden - a plant to produce 80,000 electric cookers.  ----------------------------------------------------------------------                          Top trading partners in the first nine months of 1993, showing the volume in million kroons, and percentage of total  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Country                  EEK m.         %  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 1. Finland                3,506     23.92 2. Russia                 2,815     19.21 3. Germany                1,424      9.72 4. Sweden                 1,376      9.39 5. Latvia                   746      5.09 6. Holland                  616      4.20 7. Lithuania                492      3.36 8. Ukraine                  397      2.71 9. Japan                    352      2.40 10. Denmark                 349      2.38 11. US                      311      2.13 12. UK                      216      1.48  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (6): The pace is beginning to quicken - Privatisation / This year, 155 out of the remaining 500 industrial enterprises have been prepared for sale by tender. When the Estonian government decided last year that rapid privatisation of the virtually all-encompassing state sector was a priority issue, it was not interested in re-inventing the bicycle. Instead it decided to hire an expert from Treuhand, which has been responsible for selling off former East Germany's once-vaunted 'crown jewels.' The aim was to apply German methodology, modified where appropriate to the specific local circumstances. The man and the ideas came mixed together in Mr Herbert Schmidt whose penchant for blunt speaking appears to be matched by a similarly steely resolve to get privatisation up and running demonstrated by his principal Estonian colleagues, Mr Vaino Sarnet, director of the Privatisation Agency and Mr Jaan Manitski. The trio appear to circle around each other with a mixture of mutual respect and wariness. The privatisation process started, as elsewhere in the post-communist world, where it was easiest. This meant the sale by auction or the restitution to former owners of small property - shops, restaurants and the like. The process is virtually complete, with the exception of rural land and property where restitution and other legal problems are still acute. Large scale privatisation only started to take off in August last year with the creation of the Privatisation Agency, (PA). The agency is modelled closely on Treuhand, and designed as a one-stop operation for potential investors - 'the international investor wants to know with whom he can deal,' explains Mr Vainet. 'This is the one-stop agency which carries out the privatisation programme through tenders.' The decision to proceed with privatisation as fast as possible was an all-party decision, overwhelmingly approved in parliament. This is reflected in the composition of the agency's 11-strong board. It is chaired by Mrs Liia Hanni, the minister for reform and ownership transformation, and includes representatives from the finance and economy ministries, the central bank and six political parties. As Mr Schmidt makes clear, the Estonian way eschews various forms of mass privatisation through vouchers, popular in the Czech Republic, Russia and elsewhere, as well as simple auctions to highest bidders. 'Privatisation is an economic exercise. It is not about selling assets so much as purchasing capital, know-how and access to foreign markets,' he says to nods of assent from his Estonian colleagues. 'For this,' he adds, 'the appropriate method is the tender, with no distinction between foreign or local bids.' A few restrictions on foreign participation in the Estonian economy do, however, remain. Since April 1993, foreigners have been allowed to buy land, but only in connection with a particular land-use connected to their investment, not land as such. This is not overtly discriminatory but makes it harder for ethnic Russians and others, including the 10,000 retired Soviet servicemen, from buying in potentially strategic areas. The authorities have also drawn up a list of over 20 sectors which are currently restricted for foreigners. They include electricity, harbours, gas, liquor and tobacco, but definitely not telecommunications where a joint venture between the state telecom system and Finnish and Swedish telecom companies is busy upgrading mobile and fixed land telecommunication systems in a 10-year priority programme. The pace of privatisation started to hot up towards the second half of 1993. Last year the PA signed 50 contracts involving the sale of assets worth EEK 400m. When taken together with assumed debts, future investment, job creation and other commitments this translates into deals worth around EEK 1.5bn to the economy, securing 10,000 jobs, Mr Schmidt calculates. 'This helps to make us popular with the unions,' he adds. The agency is now fully operational with 50 trained Estonian staff and 15-20 experienced consultants, thanks partly to financial and other assistance from US-AID, the EU's Phare Fund, the EBRD and Treuhand. This year some 155 out of the remaining 500 industrial enterprises have been prepared for sale by tender, out of a total of what Mr Schmidt delicately describes as 2,000 state-owned 'objects.' In practice, a high proportion of these assets can best be described as 'dogs,' like the former Soviet managed rocket and military engineering factories which ran to a different music when the economy was not about use and utility as now, but about power and authority - Soviet authority at that. Some of the old plants may be salvageable in a new form, but the fate of many will be oblivion. But this process will be much lass painful than seemed likely only two years ago. Then privatisation of state assets looked like virtually the only show in town. Now the main dynamism in the economy stems from greenfield investments and start-ups by new homegrown and foreign entrepreneurs. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (5): Key role for Treuhand's man in Tallinn - Dr Herbert Schmidt advocates a 'third way' to privatisation. As a nation that spent many centuries under the tutelage of Teutonic land owners, the Estonians tend to be admirers of most things German. And the government, faced with the task of parcelling out Estonia's state industries efficiently but fairly, has looked for advice to Berlin - in the shape of Treuhandanstalt, the German privatisation agency. This makes Dr Herbert Schmidt, Treuhand's man in Tallinn, one of the most influential figures in Estonian public life. Since taking up his job in autumn 1992, his experience and above all his contacts in the banking and corporate worlds have been of invaluable help in enabling Estonia to sell itself to the world - even at a time of instability in neighbouring Russia. 'We have kept investor confidence, despite Zhirinovksy' is Dr Schmidt's  - so far - justifiable claim. He has brought from Treuhand a 'philosophy' of privatisation - 'in some countries,' he says, 'the main purpose is the political one of dismantling the state as rapidly as possible; in others, the exercise is mainly fiscal, aimed at boosting state revenues without looking too closely at the buyers.' Dr Schmidt advocates a 'third way' to privatisation: seeing the process not as a sale of assets but a purchase of management skills, technology and capital. For 'political' privatisation, a Czech or Russian-style voucher system is appropriate; for fiscally-minded privatisers the obvious road is straight auctions. But the 'purchase' of external help can only be done by using an elaborate range of criteria to evaluate each potential buyer. Dr Schmidt has encouraged his Estonian colleagues to look not simply at the direct fiscal benefits from each bid, but at the more broadly defined 'transaction value,' which takes into account promises of long-term investment and employment. He is frank about Estonia's possible drawbacks, which makes him more plausible than when he talks about the country's undoubted assets. While Estonians are by instinct a law-abiding, even legalistic nation, the Soviet takeover of 1940 interrupted the parliament's adoption of a fully-fledged civil war code. So the only legal tradition on which Estonia can draw is the fragile one that was instituted by Russia's Tsar Alexander II in the 1860s. That makes it harder, though certainly not impossible, to draw up contracts. He likes to compare Estonia with 'Hong Kong of twenty years ago' - a strategically located 'entrepot' and outpost of capitalism, with a deep, efficiently-managed port. These assets, he reckons, should make up for the tiny size of the local market. On the future of Estonian industry, he is sure that those businesses which 'grew up naturally' in the pre-war period out of the region's own resources can restructure and flourish. But some of the manufacturing that was artificially planted in the republic by the Soviet occupiers, particularly in the defence sector, may now wither away. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (9): Super modern but still super conservative - Commercial banking profile, Hansapank. The view from Hannes Tamjaru's office at Hansapank, Estonia's second largest and most profitable private commercial bank, encompasses the onion domes and spires of Tallinn's historic city centre and the nodding cranes in the harbour from whence the city gains its wealth. The bank which started as a subsidiary of Tartu bank, one of eight banks closed by the central bank in a demonstration of its close monitoring of the fledgling banking system, began as an independent institution in January 1992. The youth of the institution is matched by that of its 250 staff. Their average age is 25. This reflects the determination of Mr Tamjaru and his eight partner-shareholders, not to employ anyone with experience in the previous state banking system, and to concentrate resources heavily in two directions - staff training and state of the art computerisation. The banking hall is super-modern and functional. The larger Estonian companies and wealthy individuals who make up the target-customer base are received by senior management in a top floor foyer lined with elegant nude statues. You could be in Scandinavia, not a former Soviet republic. The bank may be super modern, but it is also super conservative - 'our capital adequacy ratio, based on BIS standards, is 18/19 per cent, and is growing through retention of profits. But if we are cautious lenders it is partly because we have cautious borrowers,' Mr Tamjaru notes. 'Most of our lending finances working capital. So far, there is little long-term capital project financing and in any case the banking system is still too small. The total balance sheets of all the 23 private banks put together is around EEK5,000m, while the total equity base is only EEK450m, around Dollars 40m. 'As the central bank limits loans to any single customer to 50 per cent of a bank's equity, all the banks taken together could not raise more than Dollars 20m for an investment project. At our bank, we limit such loans to 20 per cent,' he adds. This means that big investment projects, like developing the new container port at Muuga, modernising and reducing pollution in the shale oil, cement and other industries or modernising telecommunications, is beyond the local banks. In 1992, the European bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) stepped into finance emergency oil shipments and ensure diversification of supply away from traditional Soviet sources. It works closely with the Estonian Investment Bank, in which it is a shareholder alongside the Nordic investment bank and the Bank of Estonia. Sumitomo bank of Japan is playing an important role in financing port modernisation. The International Finance Corporation has also announced its first investment of Dollars 10m in a Dollars 44m modernisation of the Kunda cement factory. Thus far, however, the presence of foreign commercial banks in the small domestic market of only 1.6m people is limited to the odd representative office. Given the balanced budget and the automaticity of the currency board system, there is no deficit financing to spur the development of a money market, although the Bank of Estonia has started to issue certificates of deposit which are sold at auction with interest rates close to D-mark rates on international markets. The short-term nature of the bulk of deposits is another reason why bank lending is conservative and liquidity high. At Hansapank, foreign exchange and fee income is currently higher than interest income, although the high spread between current 9.25 per cent yearly deposit rates and the 19.5 per cent average lending rate ensures a 14-16 per cent spread 'which means good business,' notes Mr Tamjaru. But lending is expected to pick up sharply this year - 'the quality of the entrepreneurs coming to us for money is rising all the time. We have been saying for a year that the economy has been growing much more rapidly than shown by the official statistics. New entrepreneurs, not privatisation, are the real movers behind economic growth. 'Business know-how is developing quickly, success is shining on our customers,' he adds with a grin. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (1): Small is beautiful - Liberated from 50 years of Soviet rule, Estonia, smallest of the Baltic states, is revelling in its new-found freedom to rediscover its historic traditions and adapt them to a modern, democratic way of life. Estonia is an encouraging place for those who argue that the dissolution of the Soviet empire has released much frustrated energy which allows the world to face the 21st century with guarded optimism. In less than three years, a small group of youthful politicians, academics, bankers and businessmen has managed to restore the liberties and customs of a small nation, introduce market-based economic reforms and shift trade and investment decisively towards the west in general and Scandinavia in particular. Taking advantage of Russia's internal turmoil after the failed August 1991 coup, Estonia, together with the other former Soviet Baltic states, promptly declared independence and then moved with great speed and determination to create a new constitution and a multi-party political system. The central bank, headed by Mr Siim Kallas, who worked closely with Russian reformers in the Gorbachev-era Supreme Soviet, reinforced economic reforms by the introduction on June 20, 1992 of an independent national currency, the Kroon. Its value is fully backed by the new state's steadily rising gold and hard currency reserves. Multi-party parliamentary and presidential elections in September 1992 allowed the formation of a broadly-based coalition government, headed by Mr Mart Laar, the 33-year-old prime minister. His 'Fatherland Coalition' of centre-right parties also secured the election of Mr Lennart Meri, a distinguished historian and film-maker, as president of the restored republic. A top priority of the newly independent state was to form a 3,000-strong armed border patrol force and a 2,000-strong national army backed by a volunteer national reserve. The army is commanded by an Estonian-American former US Army colonel and armed mainly with Israeli weapons following a Dollars 47m arms deal. Clearly, Estonians, after centuries of domination by Baltic Germans and Swedes, and subjected to nearly 300 years of Russian hegemony in the eastern Baltic, believe that strong fences make good neighbours. Not everyone is amused. Estonia's reluctance to extend nationality rights to former Soviet military personnel, and some other categories among the ethnic Russians who now make up 29 per cent of the population, has attracted the ire of Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the Russian chauvinist, and others. To which Mrs Marju Lauristin, the minister of social affairs replies: 'Such people are demanding for ethnic Russians in Estonia rights and privileges which they cannot guarantee in Russia itself.' Given that Estonia's main requirements are independence and stability, however, Mrs Lauristin argues that it is in Estonia's own best interests to see that its ethnic minorities feel at home in, and loyal to, the restored state. Such expressions of enlightened self-interest are welcomed by many Russians, especially those with family roots in Estonia, dating back to the Czarist period and the younger, better-educated business people for whom Estonia is an excellent place from which to do business with neighbouring Russia. One prerequisite for acquiring nationality is proof of minimal linguistic language ability. The Council of Europe judged this a not unreasonable request, given that ethnic Estonians, who make up 65 per cent of the population, speak a distinctive language related to Finnish and Hungarian. For most Estonians, full independence requires that the 2,500 Russian troops who remain from a once 100,000-strong Soviet occupation army, leave by August 31, 1994 - the deadline agreed with Moscow after months of difficult talks conducted by Mr Juri Luik, a government high-flyer who has just swapped the defence portfolio for the foreign affairs ministry. But in later talks Moscow withdrew this promise despite strong pressure from western governments. Despite the second thoughts in Moscow, the Soviet withdrawal is virtually complete. Only the nuclear training reactor remains to be dismantled at the big Soviet-era naval and nuclear submarine training base at Paldiski on the west coast. The huge military airfield at Tartu has been abandoned, as has the nuclear fuel plant at Sillimae, all once staffed only by non-Baltic Soviet citizens. Only 1,000 special assault troops in a barracks, 500 metres from Toompea castle, the pastel pink parliament building in the centre of the old town, remain vaguely menacing, apart from the paratroop units stationed just across the border in Russia's Vitebsk and Pskov military districts. There is less progress, and less, insistence, on an outstanding territorial claim. A swathe of territory recognised by Moscow as Estonian in perpetuity by the 1920 Tartu Treaty remains outside the de facto border of the new Estonian state. The actual frontier remains the old Soviet administrative dividing line between the Russian and Estonian Soviet republics. It will probably remain so for the foreseeable future. Moscow has signalled its determination to keep the frontier where it is by building a big, modern customs and frontier post at Ivangorod just across the river from the largely Russian-speaking Estonian city of Narva on the western bank. A similarly permanent-looking border post is currently being built by the Russians on the south-eastern border where the main Riga-St Petersburg highway crosses the Estonian line. Already much of the reduced volume of trade which crosses the borders is private, not inter-state. Estonia was tied to the Soviet Union for over 90 per cent of its trade, three years ago. Now Russia accounts for little over 20 per cent of a total which is now overwhelmingly orientated towards western markets. Finland has replaced Russia as the top trading partner. But all Estonia's gas and much of its oil and raw materials still comes from Russia while 90 per cent of the traffic through Tallinn port is linked to the former Soviet hinterland. St Petersburg, Russia's second city and the former imperial capital, is partially lit by electricity from Estonia's oil-shale fired power stations. Estonians will never be able to ignore the giant on its doorstep. The trick is working out a way of living more creatively and freely with it. After 50 years spent debating the merits of submitting to Soviet forces without firing a shot in 1940, many Estonians are determined never again to suffer the subjugation which followed the infamous Molotov-Ribbentrop pact on the eve of the Second World War. They see their future in the closest integration into western defence and economic structures, starting somewhat reluctantly with half-way houses like Nato's 'partnership for progress.' But there is also a widely spread conviction running from President Meri throughout the government and society that the future stability and prosperity of Estonia and the other Baltic states hinges largely on the degree to which the St Petersburg area can be integrated economically into what could become one of the fastest-growing regions in 21st century Europe  -the Baltic basin. Asked to look ahead and describe the Estonia he expects to see by the turn of the century, Mr Laar, the prime minister replies 'a young, modern fast-developing country that looks to Europe, is part of Europe, but maintains its own identity.' That looks well within grasp, provided Russia abides by the rules of decent international behaviour and honours the sovereignty of a small neighbour which can never be a threat but could serve Russia's interests well as a friendly, independent state and efficient trade partner. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (4): Protecting the kroon. The high priority given to the maintenance of a strong independent currency is crucial to the success of Estonia's economic reforms, writes Anthony Robinson. 'When inflationary financing is impossible and the exchange rate is not flexible, other factors such as domestic prices and wages, must adjust. Softening adjustment by inflation and money illusion is made impossible,' commented Mr Siim Kallas, governor of the National bank of Estonia and widely recognised as the key figure in monetary reform. 'Perhaps not surprisingly, currency board solutions have proven unacceptable to large countries,' he added, in a recent paper. The currency board undertakes to convert all kroons offered to it at the fixed rate of EEK 8 to DM1 and ensures that the issuance of new currency is umbilically linked to the size of the foreign exchange reserves. Indicator of success The monetary reform with its automatic link between reserves and currency issuance was supported almost unanimously by the Estonian parliament and was specifically designed to enhance the prestige of the new currency and protect it from political interference. One clear indicator of success is the level of gold and foreign currency reserves. When the new central bank published its balance sheet for the first time in July 1992, a month after the reform was introduced, reserves amounted to EEK 1,165m (DM 145.65m). The total included 11.3 tons of gold transferred abroad by the pre-war government and returned to its legal successor after the restoration of independence. Thanks largely to sharply higher tourist and other invisible receipts from the booming shipping and harbour sector, foreign reserves to back up the kroon have been piling up in the Estonian National Bank. By the start of 1994, reserves had quadrupled to EEK 5,237m (DM 655m), demonstrating the solid basis for a non-inflationary increase in the money supply needed to sustain the expected economic growth this year. FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (3): Reforms at a high price - The economy / Estonia is the first and only economic success story to emerge thus far from the wreckage of the Soviet Union. Backed by a strong, convertible currency, and wedded to balanced budgets and fiscal rectitude, a small band of young and determined economic policy makers has managed to throw off the legacy of Soviet rule and open Estonia up to trade and investment from their Baltic neighbours and the world beyond. Industrial output has been climbing steadily since February last year, contributing to a 3 per cent rise in the gross domestic product after three years of sharp declines. Overall GDP is expected to grow by 5 per cent in 1994, boosted by a fast-growing service sector, rising foreign investment, mainly from Finland and Scandinavia, the privatisation of hundreds of former state enterprises and an explosive growth in new private businesses. Economic activity is heavily concentrated on Tallinn, the capital, in which a third of the population of 1.6m live. Provided relations with Russia can be kept on an even keel, the city can look forward to a prosperous future as a 'Baltic Hong Kong,' blessed with the deepest ice-free ports in the region and perched just beyond the western extremity of virtually land-locked Russia. Three years ago, such optimism would have appeared preposterous - Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet president, warned Estonians and other independence-minded Baltic states that divorce would mean economic disaster. Well over 90 per cent of Estonia's foreign trade was conducted with the then Soviet Union which supplied energy and raw materials as well as a wide range of intermediate industrial goods. The World Bank and other institutions warned that Estonia would need to seek Dollars 1bn in foreign financing to make up for hidden Soviet subsidies and argued against leaving the rouble zone. For a time it looked as though the Cassandras from east and west might be right. In 1992, industrial production slumped 38 per cent, inflation soared to 1,069 per cent and only an emergency shipment of 100,000 tons of heating oil from Finland prevented thousands from freezing to death - literally, in the case of the old and infirm. But right in the middle of Estonia's annus horribilis an event of crucial importance took place. On June 20, 1992 the central bank initiated monetary reform by introducing the kroon, a new and independent currency fully backed by gold and foreign currencies. It was pegged to the D-mark at a fixed rate of 1 DM=8 EEK. Up to 1,500 roubles per person were exchanged at 10 roubles for one kroon, equivalent to the D-mark-Rouble parity on the day. Since then, the kroon's fixed exchange rate with what is still Europe's strongest currency has been the principle anchor of economic policy. By adopting a currency board system Estonia's monetary reformers effectively put the economy back on the gold standard of yore and laid the basis for what has become one of Europe's strongest currencies. Inflation last year was reduced to 36 per cent, economic growth is on a rising track and foreign trade doubled in volume. Finland has replaced the former Soviet Union as the main trade partner. More than 40 per cent of all imports now flow through Finnish ports only 80km away across the Gulf of Finland. Russia remains an important trade partner but took only 38 per cent of Estonian exports last year, compared to 95 per cent in 1991. It supplied only 30 per cent of Estonia's imports, mainly oil and gas, compared to 85 per cent three years ago. But the reforms which are transforming the economy have come at a high price. Average real incomes shrank dramatically over the last two years, accompanied by a rapid increase in income differentials. The young, multi-lingual, entrepreneurial types in the new banks and enterprises enjoy high and rapidly rising incomes. Civil servants, teachers and workers in the old-style state-owned enterprises, many of them ethnic Russians, have seen their incomes fall. An estimated 20 per cent of the 1.6m population live on or below the poverty line. Official statistics may tell only part of the story, however. Ms Marju Lauristin, the minister of social affairs, estimates that income from wages and salaries only accounts for 55 per cent of average family income. Part-time jobs specially in the fast-growing service sector help make up the difference. In spite of all the wrenching changes in this small economy, however, unemployment has been kept remarkably low - although employment in the official, still largely state controlled sectors of the economy, has fallen steeply. Soviet Estonia boasted 850,000 jobs, but only 635,000 official work-places remain. Despite this shrinkage in the old economy of large textile and engineering plants, oil shale mines and related heavy industry, only 16,000 workers, between 2-3 per cent of the work force, are officially unemployed. A further 45,000 are registered as semi-employed. Low unemployment is partly a function of definition. After six months looking for a job, the unemployed are struck off the unemployment pay register. Pockets of high unemployment certainly exist, especially in rural areas and in the heavy industrial areas which were built in the Soviet period and staffed largely by ethnic Russians. However, thousands of new jobs have been created in the fast-growing construction, transport, private retail and other service sectors. Tax evasion is widespread in the vibrant new capitalist economy. But recent tax reforms, introducing VAT and simplification of the income tax structure by imposing a flat rate 26 per cent personal and corporate income tax, have been designed to broaden the tax base. A reform of the social security system this year will create a self-financing health and pension system based on employer and employee contributions. The aim is to free-up the budget for more productive infrastructure and other investments.
19940503000000000	FT  03 MAY 94 / A cry for freedom: Central banks in ex-Soviet states remain under the shadow of politicians. A struggle for independence is being waged by central banks in almost all of the states of the former Soviet Union - a battle possibly as momentous as the countries themselves underwent to achieve statehood. For Mr Michael Bruno, chief economist at the World Bank, a central bank is 'the way in which society protects itself against itself'. He made his remarks last week, to a conference mounted by Chicago University's Law School which succeeded in getting most of the central bank governors of the post-communist states together to talk about their problems and listen to western bankers tell them how to protect their banks against their politicians. The legacy with which they have to cope is that of a Soviet state bank - Gosbank - which monopolised the banking field and was subservient to the Communist party, the government and the ministries. Money allocated to projects and enterprises merely passed though the bank, requiring it to develop no analytical skills; its foreign currency operations, though prudent, were relatively rudimentary; its supervisory functions perfunctory. The legacy is doubly malign in the non-Russian republics. Gosbank's headquarters in Moscow possessed a tiny corps of highly skilled bankers; its branches in the republican capitals, now independent states, had almost none. 'It's very bad when politicians don't understand the basics of the market economy. But when the central bankers don't, then it can be a disaster,' says Mr Grigory Marchenko, deputy governor-designate of the Bank of Kazakhstan. But the largest complaint from the central bank bosses is the political chaos in which they work. Mr Victor Yushchenko, Ukraine's central bank governor, works with a parliament still in the process of elections but tending against reform, a president lacking in authority, legislation to set out the the central bank's remit endlessly delayed, a plunging economy and tiny reserves. 'The central bank and the new commercial banks are in a very tough position,' he says. 'They have to act as champions of change in an environment where most of the government and the large state sector are resisting or slowing such change.' The central bankers' situations are diverse but they agree with great feeling on one thing - that their political masters should not have any right to interfere, either directly or indirectly, through over-politicised appointments. 'The government is always looking for easy money,' says Ilman Rimshevichs, the deputy governor of the central bank of Latvia, one of the most successful of the ex-Soviet economies. 'In these conditions it's hard to enforce independence and to sell off the state commercial banks which used to supply cheap credit to the enterprises.' At the other end of the scale from Latvia are republics such as Georgia and Armenia, whose economies are ruined and where to talk of existence is more germane than to talk of independence. In Georgia, for example, the currency is close to losing all meaning: from trading at 35,000 to the dollar last November, it fell to 180,000 by Christmas, and to 650,000 at the end of last month. At still another extreme is Belarus, where an agreement with Russia, signed in April, appears to open the way for the merger of the two Slav states' economies. However, Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, the governor of the country's central bank, is opposed to the deal, saying that Russian and Belorussian interests diverge too much to make union possible and calling for a strengthening of the national currency before any long-term monetary union is contemplated. Yet, he says, the conditions for a separate, fully-fledged national currency in Belarus are absent and likely to remain so. 'Now, 90 per cent of our economy is still state owned. The dominant part of the economy is composed of enterprises with 10,000 or more workers, which make mainly for the Russian or Ukrainian markets. If we let these enterprises go we will get 50 per cent unemployment. Investment in the economy has practically disappeared. We don't need monetary stabilisation: we need a programme which covers the whole economy.' The brightest star in the post-Soviet firmament is Estonia. Its prime minister, Mr Mart Laar, and its central bank governor, Mr Siim Kallas, put the success down to the strength of the bank's commitment to a stable currency. Estonia has linked the Estonian kroon to the German D-Mark and given the bank no discretion to lend to the government. At the same time, the governor cannot be fired and future governors will nominate their own successors. The result has been a hard currency, low inflation (though rising now) and an economy set to grow as fast as any in Europe this year. For Mr Kallas, the reform showed that 'money is seen not just as money, but as a crucial national symbol'. Rather more cynically, he confesses that the laws guaranteeing bank independence, linking the kroon to the D-Mark and barring the government from raiding the bank's coffers were passed through parliament 'before the deputies quite knew what it all meant'. Russia is still at the centre of the web - though none of its central bankers came to Chicago. Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the present governor, takes the contrary view to the prevailing credo of most central bankers everywhere else, that his duty is to keep enterprises going even at the cost of high inflation, and has said that he does not believe inflation is directly related to the supply of money in the economy (by contrast, the Estonians believe this with a kind of mystical fervour). As the 'owner' not so long ago of these now 'independent' banks, the Russian bank still exercises influence - the more so as Russia seeks to extend its economic union, drawing other states into the same relationship as that it wishes to have with Belarus. Mr Thomas Wolf, deputy director of the International Monetary Fund department concerned with east Europe and the former Soviet Union, noted that after the Soviet collapse, the former states tried to do two contradictory things  - to build up their national currencies and to discuss with the Russian central bank how best to draw their economies closer. This tension remains. For the central bankers, the success of Estonia and Latvia is less of a beacon than a train disappearing over the horizon - which they have missed. Unlike Mr Kallas, they were unable - or unwilling - to get change in place early while the industrial and other lobbies were disoriented. Now they must seek change in the worst kind of circumstances and many of their political leaders are tempted to lean on Russia. The Chicago gathering showed the bankers want to pursue independence: but it showed, too, how far they remain under the shadow of politics.
19940505000000000	FT  05 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Why Estonia central bank is exception. Sir, John Lloyd reports on the politicisation of central banking in the republics of the former Soviet Union ('A cry for freedom', May 3). While Mr Lloyd correctly concludes that Estonia and Latvia are success stories, he omits fully to explain why they are exceptions to the rule. In June of 1992, Estonia introduced a currency board-like system. Under that system, monetary policy is solely rule driven and insulated from political meddling. Although Latvia has a central bank that can engage indiscretionary monetary policy, it has been operating as if it was a currency board. Moreover, the Latvian central bankers have kept the politicians at bay by threatening to introduce currency board legislation, if the politicians should meddle in monetary affairs. Mr Lloyd also commits an error of commission. He concludes that it is probably too late for other republics to follow the lead of Estonia and Latvia. That is not true. In Lithuania, Mr Aldolfas Slezevicius mounted a successful campaign earlier this year to depoliticise monetary policy with the introduction of a currency board-like system. Such a system was installed on April 1. Now the litas must be fully backed by foreign reserve currencies and gold and freely convertible at a fixed rate of 4 litai per US dollar. Steve H Hanke, professor of applied economics (state counsellor on monetary and financial issues, Republic of Lithuania), The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-2686, US
19940523000000000	FT  23 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Russia yet to follow Estonia's example. Sir, Your editorial commentary 'Chernomyrdin sees the light' (May 18), attempts to portray yet another Russian prime minister as an economic reformer. You claim that Mr Chernomyrdin has taken to heart the experience of 'the former Soviet Baltic states, especially Estonia'. This assertion is incorrect. Estonia's record on inflation and growth has surpassed other former Soviet republics'. That is due, in large part, to Estonia replacing the rouble with the kroon and introducing a currency board-like system on June 20 1992. Under that system, the kroon is backed 100 per cent by foreign reserve currencies and gold and is freely convertible at a fixed rate of eight kroons per D-Mark. The Bank of Estonia cannot engage in discretionary monetary and/or exchange rate policies. It cannot finance fiscal deficits. Indeed, the bank's hands are tied, so that changes in the stock kroons are automatically determined by the free flow of monetary reserves in and out of the bank. The Russians, including the so-called reformers, have always rejected what has become the hallmark of Estonia's reforms, the currency board system. For example, in 1991 most of the future Russian 'reformers' attended meetings in Paris. It was there that the young turks selected Mr Yegor Gaidar to be their leader. It was also there that they were introduced to the currency board idea. Since then, Russians of all stripes have expended considerable effort defending the institution of central banking for Russia and objecting to the currency board alternative. If Mr Chernomyrdin is ever to be serious about the goal of currency stability, he must tie the hands of the Central Bank of Russia. To do this he must do what Lithuania did on April 1, when it followed the Estonian example. Steve H Hanke, professor of applied economics, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, US
19940527000000000	FT  27 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Latvia an equally good role model. Sir, Professor Steve Hanke's unqualified praise of Estonia's economic reforms (Letters, May 23) and his exhortations that they be used as a model for Russia, cannot be left without comment. Latvia, Estonia's neighbour has adopted a contrary approach with regard to the stability of its currency. The lat is free floating, its value having been set (as was its predecessor's, the Latvian rouble) by the supply of lats and western currency. For more than a year now, the lat has appreciated against western currencies because of an oversupply of dollars. At the same time, Latvia has achieved the lowest inflation in the Baltics (34.2 per cent, March 1993-March 1994). Conversely, Estonia's inflation rate for March 1994 jumped to 8.9 per cent, higher even than Russia's. As for the Estonian policy of shadowing another currency, Nigel Lawson, as UK chancellor, made the mistake of also shadowing the D-Mark for too long and when Britain joined the ERM, after a strained period, the pound received its come-uppance on Black Wednesday. The Estonian economy is the most successful of the former Soviet republics but, similarly to Latvia at present, it is suffering from an overvalued currency leading to difficulties with exporting and an increase in imports. In Latvia's case, when it comes to paying for imports, payment will be in western currency, the purchase of which will tend to lower the exchange rate for the lat. Estonia, with its fixed rate, will have less room for manoeuvre. As can be seen then, there is more than one way to skin a cat and Estonia's way will not necessarily bear fruit for Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin and Russia. One should not forget, either, that both Estonia's and Latvia's decisions to convert to their own currencies were frowned upon by the International Monetary Fund at the time but the Balts proved that even holy cows can be wrong. If Russia has enough confidence in its own policies, it should do whatever it thinks is right and turn a blind eye to the critics. Maris Ozols, (Riga bureau chief, Baltic Independent, March 1983-Jan 1984), 11 Heathfield Road, London W3 8EH FT  27 MAY 94 / Estonia in banking advance. Estonia has become the first of the former Soviet states to introduce electronic banking. Economic reform throughout the region has been hobbled by its antiquated banking system. Transactions can take more than three months, forcing many businesses and individuals to resort to cash and barter deals. Estonia, which in 1991 launched the most radical market reform programme in the region, has now entered the electronic banking era. Four automatic teller machines operating 24 hours a day were opened last week and tens of thousands of citizens have been invited to apply for credit cards which are already accepted by more than 250 Estonian merchants. Credit cards are commonplace among the Soviet Union's lavishly wealthy but tiny elite. However, Estonia is the first former Soviet republic to bring credit cards and cash machines to the masses.
19940621000000000	FT  21 JUN 94 / Baltic states' varied roads to freedom: Philippe Legrain reviews the economic records of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania since independence. When Estonia flouted the International Monetary Fund's advice and ditched the Russian rouble, its leaders did so in the conviction that a stable national currency was a cornerstone of their country's hard-won independence. But two years on, their initial success - inflation was held to 36 per cent last year compared with nearly 1,000 per cent in Russia - has been undermined by recent price surges. Latvia's consistently better inflation record underscores Estonia's setback and has called into question its northern neighbour's approach to monetary policy. The Bank of Latvia, while allowing the lat to float, has adopted a 'strong lat' policy and maintains high interest rates to stamp out inflationary pressures. Estonia, on the other hand, runs a currency board-like system which leaves policy on 'autopilot'. The kroon, which is pegged to the German D-Mark, is fully backed by foreign currency reserves whose ebbs and flows determine the size of the money stock. Large capital inflows, fuelled by foreign aid and investment and balance of payments financing, have sent Estonia's money supply rising fast. Consequently, inflation has shot back up to an annualised 66 per cent in the three months to May, compared with 20 per cent in Latvia. Renewed inflation has also increased the kroon's overvaluation, sucking in imports and stunting export growth. Estonia's trade deficit widened to EEK1.3bn (Pounds 66m) in the first three months of this year, equivalent to a third of export volume or about 20 per cent of estimated first quarter gross domestic product. By contrast, thanks to its superior inflation performance, the lat has not appreciated as much in real terms as the kroon and Latvia's current account has remained in surplus - Dollars 125m last year, equivalent to 5.7 per cent of GDP. Despite these drawbacks, a recent study by Professor Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University and Mr Ardo Hansson of the Bank of Estonia defends the currency board system, arguing that it gives the kroon much needed credibility. The authors point to the shift in trade from east to west - Finland has replaced Russia as Estonia's main trading partner - to back up their case. But Latvia has achieved a similar re-orientation. Although Russia is still its main trading partner, like Estonia's, about a quarter of its trade is with Russia. On April 1 the third Baltic republic of Lithuania, often considered the laggard in economic reform, plumped for the Estonian way. After a furious debate involving accusations of betraying the motherland, the government pegged the newly-issued litas to the US dollar. Inflation had stabilised at an annualised rate of 36 per cent in the three months before the decision. Lithuania recorded a 300m litas (Dollars 75m) deficit last year and trade remains angled towards former Soviet republics. Growth prospects for all three countries remain murky. Although industrial output growth is still flat, the Baltic states are hoping for growth this year for the first time since regaining their independence in August 1991. Estonia seems to have the edge but evidence is patchy. Estonia has also led the way in attracting foreign investment. Finnish and Swedish companies have piled in more than half the EEK906m - equivalent to 4.3 per cent of GDP - that flowed into the small country last year. Latvia is catching up, having overcome a legislative logjam which led prospective investors to delay committing funds. While only about Dollars 60m (2.7 per cent of GDP) was invested in Latvia in 1993, Dollars 100m is expected this year, according to the Latvian Development Agency. The UK-based multinational Cable & Wireless and Telecom Finland have announced a Dollars 1.3bn plan to modernise Latvian telecoms, Dollars 40m of which has already been invested. Kellogg, the US breakfast cereals giant, has set up a Dollars 22m plant near the capital Riga. Lithuania has attracted little foreign investment to date but is furthest down the privatisation road. More than two thirds of the companies slated for sale have been privatised, and more than half the workforce is now in the private sector. However, allegations of corruption and of Soviet-era 'red directors' buying their companies on the cheap have nearly halted the process. Estonia has opted for the East German model, having set up a privatisation agency modelled on the Treuhandanstaldt. Of more than 500 earmarked for sale, 52 companies had been sold by the start of the year, with a new wave of auctions under way. But the volume of receipts (Dollars 24m) and impact on the economy have so far been minimal. Privatisation has barely got off the ground in Latvia. A quarrel between the newly set up privatisation agency and government ministries over responsibility for the sell-offs and whether to opt for hard currency or voucher sales has hindered progress. Although Latvia aims to sell about 200 companies a year, only 85 out of a list of 703 have actually changed hands so far.
19940715000000000	FT  15 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Estonia has set good currency example. Sir, The article by Philippe Legrain, 'Baltic states' varied roads to freedom' (June 21) included a misinformed criticism of Estonia's currency board system, in which the exchange rate of the Estonian kroon is pegged to the D-Mark, and the central bank abjures domestic credit expansion. Legrain alleged that Estonia's currency arrangements were leading to high inflation and currency overvaluation. This is an odd charge, since similar currency systems, such as in Argentina and Hong Kong, have underpinned price stability. Legrain seems to have extrapolated from a single month's price increase, 8.9 per cent in March, to reach broad and unfounded conclusions. The March price increase resulted mainly from the elimination of subsidies on various service-sector prices, such as public transportation. Since March, Estonia's inflation has been among the very lowest of the post-communist economies, registering just 0.7 per cent in the month of June, and just 5 per cent for the entire second quarter. The fact is that the currency board has performed as expected, as we have shown in a detailed comparison of the Baltic state's monetary arrangements. The Estonian currency board has provided a firm anchor to Estonia's traded goods prices, which cover a large proportion of Estonia's small open economy. As expected, non-traded goods prices have risen faster than traded goods prices, partly as the result of the end of price controls, and partly as the consequence of rapid productivity improvements in the tradeable sector, which have pushed up Estonia's wages in D-Mark or dollar terms. The kroon is hardly becoming overvalued as a result of these wage increases, however, especially since dollar wage levels were remarkably low at the start of Estonia's reforms. Estonia's average industrial wage is currently about Dollars 120 a month, making Estonia highly competitive in attracting foreign capital, especially as an export platform to western Europe. This is why European, and especially Scandinavian, investors are setting up production operations in Estonia at a remarkable pace. What Mr Legrain failed to recognise is that Estonia's currency stability and strict monetary discipline have contributed to solid investor confidence, low interest rates and renewed economic growth, the highest in the Baltics and perhaps the highest of all the economies in transition in 1994. It is no wonder that Lithuania changed over to Estonia's currency board arrangements in April, and that Latvia has also recently abandoned its floating exchange rate policy in favour of a pegged exchange rate, though without the firm backing (and thus the main benefits) of the stricter currency board system. Ardo Hansson, Stockholm School of Economics, adviser to prime minister of Estonia Jeffrey D Sachs, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US
19940909000000000	FT  09 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Glasnost for ports in Estonia. The end of Soviet rule has given a new lease of life to Estonia's smaller ports, most of which were closed by Moscow to ensure tight control of the Baltic state's borders. Kunda, a small port 120km east of Tallinn shut down in 1940, reopened last week, enabling cement to be shipped directly to export markets in Germany, Belgium, the UK and West Africa. The cement is produced by Soviet-era cement works within the harbour and was mainly used domestically and transported by rail. Kunda, originally founded as a port by Tsar Alexander I in 1805, is well placed for trade with Scandinavia, Germany and the St Petersburg market, and could be used for other goods, said Mr Jan Owren, managing director of Kunda Nordic Cement - the Estonian joint-venture with American and Nordic partners, which owns both the port and the cement works. Exports are vital for the survival of the Kunda factory, as domestic consumption has plummeted since independence in 1991. Exports accounted for 70 per cent of the 440,000 tonnes of cement and clinker produced last year. In a test period since May this year, 70,000 tonnes of cement have been shipped out of Kunda, which has a capacity to ship 500,000 tonnes annually. In 1988 more than 70 per cent of the factory's 1.2m tonne output was used within Estonia, much of it by the Soviet army. The port was financed by Atlas-Nordic Cement, which has a 30.3 per cent share in Kunda Nordic Cement, while the Estonian government has retained 49.9 per cent. The building materials industry is considered an important sector for the country's economy. Other shareholders include the International Finance Corporation, the private lending arm of the World Bank; the Nordic Environmental Finance Corporation; and the Finnfund. The development of the port marks the first stage in a three year, Dollars 30m project to renovate the factory's Soviet-era machinery, increase capacity (currently 200,000 tonnes annually per kiln), and drastically reduce the dust pollution emitted by the three cement kilns. 'Our aim is to increase capacity by 30 per cent, raise production and make it profitable,' Mr Owren said. Reconstruction of the Kunda port foreshadows the Dollars 600m reconstruction of the three big deep-water ports in Tallinn.
19940929000000000	FT  29 SEP 94 / Lost symbol of economic rebirth in Baltics. The Estonia was until yesterday's disaster a powerful symbol of blossoming trade and political ties between the Nordic countries and the newly independent Baltic states. Sweden and Finland especially have built up economic and political links with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania since the three became independent in 1991. They have strongly supported the three in their efforts to remove Russian troops from their countries and have been the quickest among western countries to establish joint ventures and other trade connections. Estline, the company which operated the Estonia, is jointly-owned by the Swedish shipping company Nordstrom & Thulin and the state-owned Estonian Shipping Company. It was set up with a 10-year monopoly concession on the Stockholm-Tallinn route in 1990 as the two sides anticipated a rapid expansion of links when Moscow's hold over Estonia loosened. Although passenger and freight demand was initially disappointing, Estline began to take off two years ago and bought the Estonia early last year as its prestigious flagship, replacing a smaller ferry. The cost of Dollars 42m (Pounds 26.5m) was largely financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The ship's role as a high-profile symbol of Estonia's emerging economy was reflected in its name and its additional function as a training centre for the Estonian hotel and restaurant industry. The growing passenger and freight tonnage using the Estonia was in line with the fast-growing trade between Sweden and Estonia. Estline passenger numbers tripled from 91,700 in 1990 to 280,000 last year, prompting the company to charter a second ship to double its capacity. At the same time, Swedish exports to Estonia jumped from SKr92m (Pounds 7.7m) in 1991 to SKr850m in the first half of this year alone, while imports from Estonia reached SKr500m in the first six months of this year, compared with just SKr60m in all of 1991. Economic ties between Estonia and Finland have grown even faster, with Finnish exports to Estonia expected to approach FM3bn (Pounds 375m) this year, compared with less than FM400m in 1991. At least three Estonian and two Finnish shipping companies now operate regular services on the 75-mile Helsinki-Tallinn route.
19941003000000000	FT  03 OCT 94 / Tragedy overshadows PM's demise: John Lloyd talks to Estonia's ousted leader whose success was clouded by secret deals. After last week's tragic events in Estonia, the fall of Mr Mart Laar, prime minister of the country for two years, has been sidelined. The sinking of the ferry Estonia revealed a country still uncertain of its capacities to absorb the technical, organisational and moral consequences of the disaster: but the forced resignation of Mr Laar has so far shown a political nation determined to observe a constitutional order still in its infancy. Estonia is by some way the most successful of the former Soviet states in sloughing off a forced Sovietisation, and Mr Laar, in what was by post-communist standards a long premiership, was the central figure in the success. Dr Werner Unger, the former German ambassador to the European Commission, in Tallinn last week to advise on the country's efforts to accede to the European Union, ran through a checklist of achievements: 'A pluralistic democracy, a market economy, liberalised trade, 60 per cent of enterprises privatised, GDP growing, unemployment (1.8 per cent) much lower than western Europe, no budget deficit, public debt 5 per cent of GDP, exports growing, imports growing more rapidly because of the purchase of investment goods and an influx of foreign investment. Wonderful.' Why on earth should a prime minister go after all of that? Because he was seen to conceal vital matters from parliament, a grave matter in a plain-speaking state. Soon after his accession to office in October 1992, he and Mr Siim Kallas, chairman of the Estonian central bank, sold nearly Rbs2bn which had been dumped in the bank just before the country adopted its own kroon currency - to Chechnya, the rebel Russian republic. It was done secretly, by intermediaries who were close to the prime minister, and it came to light only this year; it was underscored by the revelation of another secret Laar deal: to buy small arms from Israel for Estonia's new armed forces. The case against is that Mr Laar concealed the deal, and may have allowed intermediaries to benefit (there has been no public charge that he benefited himself) and thus damaged a still fragile democratic system. His defence, vigorously put in an interview, is that 'there was no time for discussion; Kallas and I were the monetary committee charged with all matters affecting the introduction of the new currency; and frankly, the money helped us enormously in making the budget.' The three-to-one vote against him in the parliament last week he interprets as a signal that the parties in coalition with his Pro Patria group, unable to sustain the hard pounding attendant on severe observance of a tight money programme, were seeking ways out. The social democrats, whose defection sealed his fate, left because they could not get a rise in the low unemployment benefit. For the neo-liberal Mr Laar, issues like these are fundamental. 'We have been pressing hard on the people out of work to get other jobs. We won't increase the benefit except to those who take training for new jobs. And you see the result: low unemployment.' The two institutions which have done most to ingrain the market culture into Estonia - the Laar cabinet and the central bank - remain very largely confident that they have shorn up capitalism against any future ruin. Nowhere else in the post- Soviet mosaic has such a self-confident cadre of reformers emerged. Mr Enn Teimann, the deputy chairman of the bank, says that 'the legislation of the country (which forbids the central bank to lend money to the budget) will not allow irresponsibility. It is possible that politicians can change this but I don't fear it.' The prime minister, who had in parliament warned that Estonia was still a fragile country vulnerable to populism, appeared to largely discount that: 'It would be very hard. There has been such a change of character in the people. The old communist nomenclatura has no base.' Mr Laar's optimism is bolstered by the fact that his partner in the concealed rouble deal, central bank chairman Kallas, has emerged as the candidate of the right for prime minister, and is supported by some of those who passed the vote of censure on the prime minister. The opposition parties are very much divided: the only candidate talked of is Mr Tiit Vahi, briefly prime minister before Mr Laar, who, says the latter, left him a legacy of high inflation and an untackled structural crisis. 'For the first months I had an appointment book which was full from morning to night with meetings with directors, who wanted the cheap credit they had always got. I told each of them 'you cannot get it'.' Choosing a new prime minister is the task of Mr Lennart Meri, the president  -a role with limited powers which, Mr Laar (no ally) says he constantly tried to exceed. Mr Meri, consumed last week with the dolorous task of giving public representation to his country's loss, will this week resume the talks with faction leaders from which a candidate should come. His own preference is for a centrist figure: Mr Kallas is not that. Estonia may be in for a change of course: but it will not be fundamental.
19941213000000000	FT  13 DEC 94 / Estonia takes Treuhand sell-off route: About 80 per cent of the young Baltic state's enterprises are in private hands after a German-style search for new investment and management. Tallinn's Polumeer basketball factory was a central planner's dream. Rubber mixers, vulcanisers, moulders and weaving machines were imported from Japan to produce a million balls a year for the Soviet Union. Alas, before a single orange Polumeer could be made, political winds shifted and newly independent Estonia's Polumeer lost its guaranteed basketball market. The plant is now up for sale along with 41 other large state-owned enterprises under the northernmost Baltic country's fifth and last international tender. 'One million basketballs a year is a little too much for Estonia (which has a population of only 1.5m),' says Mr Vano Sarnet, director of the Estonian Privatisation Agency. 'And the export market is very competitive, divided by major players long ago. Even Russia only wants western basketballs.' The two-year-old privatisation programme, based on Germany's Treuhand model, has sought to salvage just such companies with fresh investment and new management. 'Through direct sales we can bring effective owners into our economy much faster than through voucher privatisation,' says Mr Sarnet. A good bid for Polumeer would include a price estimate, employment and investment guarantees, and a business plan on how a rubber ball plant can compete, he says. The agency then selects the winner and monitors the contract. By this method, 192 companies have been sold for Dollars 98.2m, putting about 80 per cent of state property in private hands, excluding transport and public utilities infrastructure. A further Dollars 65m in capital inputs has been pledged and 24,400 jobs guaranteed. Foreigners account for about 40 per cent of investment. The agency plans to finish its work by next year. Public utilities, train lines, harbours and oil shale industries are to go up for sale then, too. The World Bank this spring praised Estonia's progress, after a slow start. But the system has its critics. Mr Ardo Hanson, an American economist who helped put together Estonia's currency board system, says the privatisation programme is too subjective and bureaucratic and is ill-suited for relatively dynamic Estonia. Once a contract is signed, adds Mr Hanson, 'it's not clear what happens when the buyer wants to change conditions'. The World Bank was also worried that the Treuhand model might keep 'leftover items' from successful privatisations on state books too long  - such as the basketball factory, whose parent company was broken up and sold off last year. The agency has therefore moved to put these companies on the market. The investor most interested in Polumeer Basketball is Polumeer Toys, a privatised offshoot of the parent company. Unlike Russia or Lithuania, where a preferential employee voucher programme enabled many old directors to keep control over their old factories, in Estonia they must submit a competitive bid. Mr Ulo Uisk, who runs the rubber department at Polumeer Toys, is guardedly stoic. He only concedes that, 'since this is the biggest rubber manufacturing in Estonia, it is important to keep it going in Estonian hands.' While very open to foreign investment - it is the only former Soviet republic that permits foreigners to own land - Estonia has felt a ripple of political backlash in recent months. A public opinion poll this month found that the privatisation agency and the police were Estonia's least-trusted institutions. An Estonian analyst notes this stems not only from the large flow of foreign investment, which doubles every six months, but also from the perception that criminal domestic groups are legally capitalising on the bid scheme. Last week Mr Indrek Toome, Estonia's last Soviet prime minister and now active in real estate, was arrested for offering a Dollars 2,400 bribe. His role in privatising the large Viru Hotel in central Tallinn fed public discontent about privatisation. Under political pressure, the Estonian government last month went ahead with a voucher privatisation programme, against Treuhand's advice. Shares in the large Tallinn Department Store were offered on November 9, and three other prominent companies are due on the market early next year. A single core investor still will keep a majority in these companies to provide the corporate governance the Estonian programme's supporters say the country's neighbours to the east and south lack. Another benefit from voucher privatisation is an expected boost to Estonia's fledgling equities market. Mr Alvo Reiner, who runs the Exchange Association of Estonia, expects the input of capital into the market, not only into companies, to help open a real stock exchange in a year. Mr Sarnet defensively says Estonia's scheme at first helped bring in capital and restructure inefficient companies, such as Polumeer, but adds new methods may now be needed.
