10000000000000000	solar energy around the world Provide reasons for using solar energy  How widespread internationally is its use and development  Discuss cooperation between nations  Which nations are the leaders in solar energy development.
19960425000000000	Australia to Hold 1st Solar Boat Race. CANBERRA, April 25 (Xinhua) -- Australia will hold its first international solar boat race Saturday. A total of 29 boats powered by non-polluting energy will take part in the race on Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra, national capital of the country. The entrants are from Australia, Germany and Denmark. The race is part of the ongoing Australian Science Festival which was launched by Federal Minister for Science and Technology Peter McGauran Friday and will end Sunday. Race adviser Hans Tholstrup said that the boat race is a most exciting innovation in a world-wide search for renewable energy. Most of the boats are solar powered, including a lightweight boat specially designed for the race by a catamaran firm in Tasmania. A trimaran developed by the Australian Maritime Services Authority (AMSA) is powered by a 1500-watt engine run by 48 solar panels. A middle school from South Australia also presents its "Sunboat II" which sleeps seven people and took 100 people over nine months to build. The 11.2-meter-long boat set a world record recently by sailing 2,500 km on River Murray. "Compared with solar car, the boat has many advantages including fewer building costs and speedier commercial returns," Tholstrup said. He said that solar powered boats had a more immediate commercial prospect than solar cars. "Boats for recreation, fishing or even tourist boats may be used as the sun takes them along for a quiet holiday on a lake, river or dam. Even ocean travel is not excluded. "The other great value of alternative energy boats is that they are minimum pollution boats. Waterways restricted previously to human use or to sail because of pollution may be opened up to them," he said. David Gray from AMSA said that the race provided his company with an opportunity to take advantage of emerging technologies, especially those that solve real world problems. "We are specially mindful of the need to develop renewable energy and power sources that effectively protect the marine environment," he said. Australia is leading the world in a number of areas of solar energy research and application. The University of New South Wales has developed the most efficient ultra-thin solar cell in the world. The University of Sydney holds the record for the best-performing high-tech material for solar thermal electricity.
19960607000000000	US Solar Industry in Export Boom. NEW YORK, June 6 (Xinhua) -- Harnessing the sun and selling it abroad, the u.s. solar industry is in export boom and u.s.-made solar panels are becoming popular in developing countries. New York Times Wednesday released a set of pictures which shows a man from India in front of a solar-powered home, one of 50,000 to be converted; Tibetan herders using panels for electricity; and in Somalia, a traveling medical clinic using solar energy to keep vaccines cold in a refrigerator. From India and Indonesia to Mexico and Brazil, solar panels made in America are spouting on thousands of roof-tops, lighting up jungles, deserts and other hard-to-wire areas of the developing world that have never been connected to conventional power grids. All this means big business for the companies that make solar equipment in the United States. Statistics indicate that those companies are taking in 300 million u.s. dollars, or 30 percent of the worldwide market, making the United States the biggest center of solar manufacturing in the world. The u. s Energy Department predicts that global sales will jump by 70 percent over the next five years.
19960807000000000	Israel to Help Ningxia Develop Solar Energy. YINCHUAN, August 7 (Xinhua) -- Scientists from the Israeli Energy Ministry have agreed to cooperate with the Environmental Protection Bureau of northwest China's Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region to develop solar energy. The first group of proposals includes forming a Sino-Israeli center to expand the use of solar energy in the region, and developing an energy-efficient solar water heater, which would be especially suited to sunny north China. With reserves of coal, oil and gas, Ningxia is one of the country's major energy production centers. But the use of chemical-petroleum has caused serious pollution in many parts of the region, including the capital city of Yinchuan. Scientists said that a quick way to settle the problem is to replace the chemical energy with solar energy. The region has a large potential for solar energy, with 3,000 hours of sunshine a year and more than 140,000 calories of radiation energy per sq cm. All previous experiments on the use of solar energy have failed, due to the lack of advanced science and technology. Cooperation with Israel should lead to better results, regional officials believe.
19960815000000000	Solar Energy Heats up Inner Mongolia. HOHHOT, August 15 (Xinhua) -- Schoolchildren in north China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region have been given a practical lesson in solar energy. For the pupils from Hexigten Banner, winter months meant cancelled classes because the cold was too unbearable. They have been rescued from the big freeze by the power of the sun. Nearly 10,000 square meters of classrooms with solar energy heating system have been built, saving students from the cold. The banner has become a model area in the region in the development of solar energy. It has vowed to install solar heaters in all classrooms in the rural or pastoral areas within five years. Solar energy has been widely applied in the life of farmers and herdsmen in all parts of the region. So far, 4.42 million square meters of residences for human beings and shelters for domestic animals have been built, according to the regional new energy office. Solar energy is even used in the area 49 degrees north latitude, it said. Inner Mongolia has plenty of solar energy potential, with each square meter of space receiving energy up to 1,779 kilowatt hours annually, second only to Tibet in China. Abag Banner has built nearly 4,200 square meters of houses heated by solar energy since 1986. Temperatures are as low as 44.2 degrees below zero centigrade, but temperatures inside the herdsmen's houses stand above 15 degrees centigrade. Experts said that solar energy houses are undoubtedly the best choice to help migrating herdsmen to settle down. Solar energy is also used to raise domestic animals. Bairin Right Banner has built 700,000 square meters of shelters for domestic animals. It is calculated that by introducing solar energy, income from raising each cattle can increase 500 yuan (about 60 US dollars), while income of raising each sheep or goat can increase 100 yuan.
19960822000000000	Solar Energy Probed in Uganda. KAMPALA, August 22 (Xinhua) -- A three-men team said that the Uganda government is considering to intruduce solar energy to the rural areas, "the New Vision" reported today. The team now is carrying a market servey for the purpose. The team demonstrated to members of the district local councils the solar equipment used in tapping solar electricity which included the bulbs, the panels which store solar energy, the solar-operated laterns and battery. The team consisted of United Nations Development Program official in charge of global environment facility Steve Hirch, Chairman of all solar companies in Uganda John Semanda, and the principal energy officer in the Mministry of Natural Resources Livingstone Bangi. Uganda is a fuel poverty-striken country. It consumed imported oil. enditem =08221026 =08221022 NNNN 18:27 18:27 g # PAB
19960918000000000	Solar Program Adopted at Harare Summit. HARARE, September 17 (Xinhua) -- The ongoing solar summit here this evening adopted a program on the development and utilization of solar and other renewable energy sources in the 10 years to come. According to the "program on solar energy 1996-2005", 253 projects will be launched in various countries during the 10-year period to demonstrate the technical feasibility, economic viability and social and political acceptability of solar enrgy. These projects are divided into five categories, namely, the rural electrification program, the global education and training program, the water desalination and purification program, the information and communication program, as well as the industrial policy, market penetration and technology transfer program. Of these projects, some are identified as high-priority national projects and the others are high-priority regional projects and global projects of universal value. The program says the World Solar Commission, which drew up the program, will accomplish these projects through mobilizing a concerted global effort with the continued cooperation and commitment of various governments, international organizations, bilateral and multilateral funding institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, research organizations and universities. These projets were all put forward by various governments at the request of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the past three years and decided by the World Solar Commission. Chinese energy experts attending the summit said the program on solar energy is the most important document in the development and use of renewable energy sources in the next 10 years. They said the energetic implementation of the program will greatly increase the level of developing and using the renewable energy sources and actively promote the preservation of the environment and the development of economy.
19970223000000000	Vietnam to Speeds Up Development of Renewable Energy. HANOI, February 23 (Xinhua) -- Vietnam is to accelerate the development of renewable energy in remote regions in a bid to have 70 percent of its population in mountain areas covered by the national power grid, the official press reported today. The energy sources include solar energy, wind power, hydro-electricity and gas generated from biological materials. Southern regions in Vietnam have the advantage to develop solar energy. Cu Chi, in the outskirts of the Ho Chi Minh city, is the first locality in the country to have used solar power, reports said. In the north, though the use of solar energy is limited in winter time, solar energy has been used in water heating for nurseries, hospitals and families, according to reports. In 1997, more solar power stations are planned for mountainous and remote areas where the national power grid cannot reach in the near future.
19970226000000000	Seminar on Solar Energy Opens in Yaounde. YAOUNDE, February 25 (Xinhua) -- The seminar on solar energy and development opened in Yaounde today with emphasis on the advantages of solar energy in rural areas. Participants mentioned that in most African countries, 70 percent of the population live in rural areas. However, the living communities are small and isolated with no access to electricity. But they need electricity for pumping water and increasing production, one of the participants noted. They cannot get it in the conventional way. But with solar energy, they can have electricity at a very low cost, participants said. Solar energy is an important social economic asset especially in rural areas where electricity is still a rare commodity. Forty participants from around the world attending the seminar will identify national projects to be involved within the framework of the world energy program aiming at developing solar energy in rural zone.
19970227000000000	Seminar on Solar Energy Ends in Yaounde. YAOUNDE, February 26 (Xinhua) -- The two-day seminar on solar energy ended here this evening after discussing how to develop and apply solar energy in the rural areas in Africa. Minister of Scientific and Technical Research, Bava Djingoer, urged the experts to design specific projects and concrete recommendations on the use of solar energy especially in remote villages. The basic aim of the request is complementing conventional energy with solar energy especially for lighting. The seminar was attended by 40 participants coming from African and European countries. Research in solar energy and its eventual application began in the central African country of Cameroun in 1980.
19970817000000000	US to Develop Solar Industry. NEW YORK, August 16 (Xinhua) -- The United States aims to increase the number of solar industry employees to 70,000 by 2010 from some 12,000 now, industry sources said. The goal is in line with the Clinton administration's scheme to put a million solar systems on the roofs of commercial and residential buildings by 2010. As the leading producer of solar energy in the world, the U.S. put out 38.9 megawatts in 1996, sharing 44 percent of world production of 88.6 megawatts, followed by two other major producers -- Japan and Europe, the industry publication PV News reported. The government has invested some 1.5 billion U.S. dollars in the solar industry in the past 25 years and is continuing to encourage the use of solar cells to decrease gases omitted from burning of fossil fuels. Local governments have also started to make efforts in this direction. California is to allocate 54 million dollars in 1998 for subsidies to solar energy users while Arizona requires that at least 1 percent of new energy generation comes from solar resources. The industry has to lower solar cell prices to find more local consumers. About two thirds of last year's solar cell sales totaling 850 million dollars came from overseas.
19971030093800000	Minister: Egypt in Drive to Develop Wind, Solar. CAIRO, October 29 (Xinhua) -- There is a growing trend in Egypt to take full advantage of the blessing of abundant sunshine and swift wind to diversify the country's energy source, said a top energy official. The development of the two energy resources will add to the traditional and predominant power generation means through oil and hydro resources in meeting an ever-increasing energy need, which is growing at 12 to 14 percent yearly, said Minister of Electricity and Energy Osman Abaza. Telling foreign reporters at a press conference here Wednesday evening, the minister expected the share of the solar and wind energy in the total will increase to five percent by the year 2005 from the current one percent. He boasted his country's perpetual brilliant sunshine and powerful wind, saying the potential for exploration is vast. Study showed good wind potential along the coasts of the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Gulf of Suez, South Sinai and the Oweinat oasis area in the Western Desert. Investors, both public and private, are vying to inject money in renewable energy, the minister said, pointing to a national map to illustrate where giant windmills will be seen over the coming decades. Research on wind energy started in Egypt in the 1980s, followed by the establishment of wind farms in such coastal cities as Hurghada, Ras Ghareb and Zafarana, according to Abaza. The biggest wind project aided by German-Danish expertise is under construction in Zafarana, almost 200 kilometers south of Cairo. It will turn out half of the country's non-traditionally generated energy when it is completed at the start of the next century. Solar energy, less exploited than the wind, is now used in the newly developed areas along the Red Sea, the northern coast and the areas where electricity is unavailable, he said. But studies have found that the total annual solar radiation ranges from 1,800-2,500 kilowatts hour (kwh) per square meter, making Egypt one of the most suitable areas in the world for the exploitation of solar energy. In 1996, Egypt generated around 54.4 billion kwh of electricity and consumed 45.6 billion kwh. By the year 2000, it is estimated, Egypt will need 101 billion kwh annually.
19971105000000000	Germany Wants to Be World No.1 Provider of Solar. BONN, November 4 (Xinhua) -- Germany today announced its plan to considerably expand its production capacity of solar cells and modules in a bid to replace the United States as the world No.1 provider of solar technology. Under an agreement signed today by German Research Minister Juergen Ruettgers and local governments of two western German states, the German federal government would provide financial support to set up a large solar cell factory in Gelsenkirchen in the Ruhr industrial area. Large capacity expansion is also planned at an existing solar cell factory in the state of Bavaria. With the help of the new production capacities, Germany would be able to cover about one third of world demand for solar technology in the future, Ruettgers announced. Under a study conducted by the German Shell company, solar energy is likely to cover 40 to 50 percent of the world energy demand in about 20 years. The current expensive production costs of solar energy are also expected to be halved within five years through the application of new technology and mass production of solar cells and modules.
19971112000000000	Israel to Tap Solar Energy With Zimbabwe. HARARE, November 11 (Xinhua) -- Zimbabwe and Israel are likely to enter into joint development of solar and renewable energy, an Israeli official said today. Visiting Israeli Director of Energy Resources Management Department in the Ministry of National Infrastructure Joseph Nowarski said solar and renewable energy offers great potential for economic cooperation between Israel and Zimbabwe. He said Zimbabwe's solar energy development infrastructure is at an advanced stage. "I am on a two-day visit at the invitation of the Zimbabwean government which, after hosting the solar summit last year, feels responsible for continuing efforts to make solar energy more popular worldwide," he said. During his stay, Nowarski is scheduled to meet officials from the Zimbabwean Ministry of Transport and Energy Wednesday to discuss possible areas of cooperation. Israel, whose territory is 60 percent desert, is one of the leading world users of solar energy. It carries out extensive solar research and development at a number of universities and institutions at desert to provide substantial amounts of solar-derived power. Zimbabwe, with prolonged periods of sunshine throughout any given year, plans to maximize the use of solar energy in rural areas where 80 percent of the 12.4 million people live.
19980131000000000	A Quarter Of China's Solar Energy Produced In Southwest. KUNMING, January 31 (Xinhua) -- Remote Yunnan Province in the southwestern part of China has become a leading solar energy producer, accounting for a quarter of the country's solar energy output. The province can now produce 300,000 sq.m. of solar panels for solar-energy heaters each year, giving an annual solar-energy output of 400 kilowatts. The products sell nationwide and in the U.S., Japan, Canada, Singapore, and Thailand as well. With its heavy amount of solar radiation, the province has the equivalent of 69.5 billion tons of standard coal, or six times of the province's total coal reserves. The solar energy is widely used in telecommunication, meteorology, earthquake forecasts, and forest fire prevention. The province has built over 30 solar-powered TV relay stations.
19980216000000000	Tibet Gets Solar-Powered Streetlights In Its Capital. LHASA, February 16 (Xinhua) -- Streetlights that are powered by solar energy have become a new feature in Lhasa, capital of Tibet Autonomous Region. Early in the morning, people on their way to pray will stop and look with great interest at the lights by Dragon King Pool behind the Potala Palace. A special piece of silicon half a meter square at the top of a lightpole stores enough energy during the daytime to provide electricity for 68 lights on the roads near the pool all through the night. The 820,000 yuan (98,700 US dollars) cost of the solar-energy streetlights came from the Beijing municipal government. It is estimated that the whole project will cost 15 million yuan. Tibet has an average of 3,100 to 3,400 hours of sunlight annually in most areas because of its high elevation and thin air. In order to make full use of the solar energy, the local government has spent more than 17 million yuan on solar-energy facilities to heat water, green houses, and solar-energy stoves. Solar energy produces profits of about 80 million yuan each year in Tibet.
19980611200300000	In cloudy Holland, a bright future for solar power. AMERSFOORT, Netherlands (AP) _ It's another typically cloudy Dutch day, but Rien van Stigt can still hear the soft hum of his solar-powered boiler heating up water for dishes and the shower. 
19980707000000000	Solar Power Markets to Continue Booming. NEW YORK, July 6 (Xinhua) -- World solar markets are growing at ten times the rate of the oil industry, U.S. Worldwatch Institute reported on Monday. Solar power has grown at 16 percent annually since 1990 compared to merely 1.4 percent for oil energy growth, the Washington-based institute said in a press release. In 1997 alone, sales of solar cells expanded over 40 percent. Solar power capacity has reached 800 megawatts, representing only less than one percent of global power supplies. As governments move to implement the Kyoto Protocol on climate change and replace fossil fuels, solar power is poised to benefit. The institute said for the 2 billion people worldwide who are not yet connected to power lines, solar energy is often the most affordable way to get electricity.
19980916000000000	Zambia to Complete Construction of Solar Panel. LUSAKA, September 16 (Xinhua) -- A solar panel manufacturing plant will be completed construction in six months in the capital city of Lusaka, the government-owned Times of Zambia said Wednesday. The paper quoted the company's director Vic Ranchhod as saying in Lusaka Tuesday that the plant, which will cost one billion Kwacha or 500,000 U.S. Dollars, will manufacture solar panels to facilitate provision of solar power to the Zambians. With an initial capital of 400 million Kwacha (about 200,000 dollars), the firm has already provided solar energy systems to 36 of its 120 customers who have made enquiries in the last 10 weeks. Apart from power installations, the company will also sell solar panels, inverters and batteries which have been imported from South Africa, according to Ranchhod. He said plans to appoint local agents in other provinces are underway.
19990602000000000	Japanese Helping on Chinese Solar-Energy Power Station. LHASA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Work on a solar-energy power station was completed today and it started generating electricity for a primary school in a suburb of the Tibetan regional capital of Lhasa. A Japanese new energy research and development institute helped the power station as part of solar energy cooperative project between China and Japan to help China's less-developed areas. Tibet has plenty of solar energy resources and Japan has a great deal of experience in the use of solar energy, according to a local official, who says that China and Japan will continue to cooperate in building power projects in Tibet.
19990916000000000	Solar Energy Air-conditioning Project in East China. JINAN, September 16 (Xinhua)-- A new solar energy air- conditioning project in Rushan City in east China's Shandong Province has passed appraisal by the Ministry of Science and Technology and the energy institute of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). This demonstration project, the largest of its kind in China, was created by the Beijing Solar Energy Lab, and replaces conventional fuels with solar energy to help protect the environment. Compared with conventional compression air-conditioners, the project can save about 60 percent in electricity use per year, experts say. The project has a large solar receiver which operates over an area of 540 square meters and can provide 100 kilowatts of heating or cooling capacity. In spring and autumn, the system can also provide 30 tons of hot water for households daily.
19991011000000000	Solar Energy Will Be Widely Used in Northwest China. YINCHUAN, October 11 (Xinhua) -- Solar energy will be utilized in a wide range of areas in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, northwest China, with the adoption of the Sunshine Plan made by the local government. It will take three to five years to promote the use of solar energy in both remote mountain and comparatively well-off irrigated areas, and one million yuan (about 115,000 U.S. dollars) has been earmarked for the first phase of the plan. With 3,000 hours of sunshine a year, Ningxia is one of China's regions ripe for the use of solar energy, and it has been developing the use of this energy source since the 1970s. At present, thousands of solar powered appliances and dozens of solar-heated houses are in use in many parts of the region. Apart from China's own expertise, Ningxia intends to learn from Israel, Germany, Japan and other countries which have made great achievements in the field of solar energy.
20000125000000000	Canada, China Cooperate in Developing Solar Energy. BEIJING, January 25 (Xinhua) -- People in underdeveloped regions of China will benefit from a project developed by the Canada-based ATS corporation, which is aimed at promoting solar energy technology for generating electricity. The Canadian federal government will sponsor the project, said visiting Canadian Minister of Natural Resources Ralph Goodale today at a seminar dedicated to meeting China's future energy demands. The ATS, headquartered in Ontario, is developing special technology for producing a solar-energy board capable of turning solar energy into electricity. This technology is particularly suitable for the regions that are presently without electricity. Goodale is currently leading a large trade and investment delegation to China, South Korea and Japan. "Such high-tech companies as ATS have great potential for cooperating with China and creating economic and social benefits," he said.
20000227000000000	China Provides Solar Energy Technology to Zimbabwe. HANGZHOU, February 27 (Xinhua) -- China is using advanced solar energy technology to help meet the energy demand in Harare, capital of Zimbabwe. According to a local source, solar energy equipment will soon be flown to Harare from Hangzhou, capital of east China's Zhejiang Province, The equipment will be provided and operated by Zhejiang Provincial Energy Research Institute and Zhejiang Meida Solar Energy Industry Corporation Ltd. China provided solar systems to rural households in Zimbabwe to generate electricity in 1998. Many other African countries have shown great interest in purchasing solar energy technology from Zhejiang.
20000510000000000	Yunnan Develops Solar Energy. KUNMING, May 10 (Xinhua) -- Yunnan Province in subtropical southwest China has become a leader of the country in the utilization of solar energy. At present, the province has some 200 solar water heater plants with a combined annual production of more than 400,000 square meters. The products are well sold in northwest and southwest parts of China, and southeast Asian countries. Yunnan Province, rich in solar energy, has set up a solar energy research center, the country's first station for inspecting the quality of solar water heaters and a key lab for rural energy resources projects. The province has made marked progress in developing solar water heater, solar furnace, solar battery and basic theoretical research on the solar energy. The use of solar energy saves the province more than 100 million kwh of electricity each year, local officials said. Professor Xia Laifeng from Yunnan Teachers' University, the solar energy research base in the province, said that they are studying the possibility of building "solar energy houses," which use solar energy for heating and air conditioning, and are decorated with solar energy equipment.
20000825203400000	OFF THE GRID.
