10000000000000000	Life risking Heroic Acts What are some outstanding instances of heroic acts the hero was in danger of losing his her life while saving others in imminent danger of losing their own lives  Instances should include events occurring in the U S  only.
19890110000000000	SALUTING THE HEROES; DEPUTIES HONORED FOR RISKING THEIR LIVES TRYING TO SAVE OTHERS. Sheriff's Deputies Tim Parker and Gean Okada risked their lives trying to save two small children from a burning house in South-Central Los Angeles. Deputy Ronald Gilbert and four other sheriff's officers pulled two men from a burning van 15 seconds before the vehicle exploded. And Deputy Hagop Kuredjian saved the life of a Malibu woman who was hanging from a tree branch on a hillside over the Pacific Coast Highway on the Fourth of July.  Ceremony Held On Monday, in a ceremony observed by 108 members of the latest graduating class of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, those officers were honored as heroes. Introducing the officers at a ceremony at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, Sheriff Sherman Block kept his remarks brief. "Far too much attention is given to the anti-heroes," Block said. With that, Block presented the department's highest award for heroism, the Medal of Valor, to Parker for his actions in May, 1988, when he tried unsuccessfully to save the lives of two children trapped in a burning house. Parker and Okada, who was awarded a Silver Meritorious Conduct Medal, arrived at the house just before midnight and were told that children were trapped inside. Parker braved the flames repeatedly in an effort to find them, suffering second-degree burns on his arm and hand. Okada fought the fire from outside the house. One child died of smoke inhalation during the fire, and the other died 10 days later. After receiving his award Monday, Parker said he still thinks of the children. "You just have to deal with it (their deaths)," he said. "You do the best job you can and hope that it will produce the results you want." Also awarded the Medal of Valor were Deputy Gilbert and former Deputy Lewis Hicks, who resigned from the department last week. Gilbert and Hicks were two of five officers who came across a fiery traffic accident in Lynwood last May, involving a van that had crashed into a bus bench. Fighting off choking smoke and flames, Hicks and Gilbert dragged one passenger out of the van, while officers Hilbrand Goedhart and David Sauer rescued the driver. Goedhart, Sauer and Deputy Allyn Martin, who had launched the rescue operation while off-duty, were honored Monday with Gold Meritorious Conduct Medals. Also receiving a Gold Meritorious Conduct award was Kuredjian, who rescued a Malibu woman last July 4 after she almost fell to her death while watching a fireworks display. Kuredjian responded to a 911 call after the woman had fallen down a steep incline over Pacific Coast Highway and found her hanging from a tree branch 150 feet over the highway.  Pulled to Safety Kuredjian could not pull her up with his arms, so he made his way below the woman and coaxed her into dropping 5 feet, where he caught her and pulled her to safety. A Silver Meritorious Conduct Medal was also awarded to Deputy Richard Wright for his efforts to rescue the occupants of a burning car in Riverside County in 1987. Wright and a paramedic managed to drag one of four passengers from the burning car, but the passenger later died. Commenting on the bravery of the officers at the ceremony was state Supreme Court Justice Malcolm Lucas, who noted that "some of the most successful police work" never requires taking a gun from a holster. Borrowing a line from the "Hill Street Blues," TV series, Lucas advised his audience: "Let's be careful out there."
19890213000000000	SORROW TRAILED A VETERAN WHO SAVED A PRESIDENT AND THEN WAS CAST IN AN UNWANTED SPOTLIGHT. The circumstances of Billy Sipple's death came as no surprise to his friends. Sometime around Jan. 19, Sipple turned on his television and lay on his bed, half-gallon bottles of cheap bourbon and 7-Up within reach, and fell asleep. Two weeks later, Wayne Friday stopped by Reflections, a Polk Street bar that was one of Sipple's daily stops. The bartender, worried that Sipple had not been by for days, asked Friday to check up on him. Without even opening the door of Sipple's apartment, Friday, an investigator for the San Francisco District Attorney, knew that his friend was dead. "People shouldn't die like that, alone," Friday said.  Littered With Mementos Sipple's $334-a month apartment looked like a junk store gone to seed. Mementos of value only to their owner were arranged in no order. Bad paintings covered chipped plaster. His most prized possession, a framed letter, hung on a corner wall. "Dear Mr. Sipple," the letter began. "I want you to know how much I appreciated your selfless actions last Monday. The events were a shock to us all, but you acted quickly and without fear for your own safety. By doing so, you helped to avert danger to me and to others in the crowd. You have my heartfelt appreciation." Signed, Jerry Ford. The letter was dated Sept. 25, 1975. Three days earlier, Oliver (Billy) Sipple, a disabled Vietnam Marine veteran, happened to be at Union Square when Sara Jane Moore aimed a .38 caliber revolver at then-President Gerald Ford. Sipple lunged and knocked away the gun. The bullet went wild. The President was whisked away, safely. Anyone would have done the same thing, Sipple told his friends. It was no big deal. Others saw it differently. Not only was he a hero, he was gay, and actively involved in gay politics and in causes -- a fact known widely here but not elsewhere. In San Francisco in 1975, gays were seeking political power -- and there were many who thought Sipple's heroic act could go a long way toward dispelling myths and stereotypes about gays here and across the nation. Sipple was about to become famous. In the process, he would suffer. His story was news, but it forever estranged him from his parents. He knew he had problems before the fame but he also maintained that the problems became far worse after: he became more nervous, drank more, considered suicide and thought people were following him.  Right to Privacy "I have a lot of stress and I take it out on booze," he said in a 1979 deposition, describing what his flash of fame had brought. Sipple's story is retold in journalism schools and discussions about the right to privacy. There was even mention of it in the movie, "Absence of Malice." The reporter portrayed by Sally Field wrote a story that prompted the subject to commit suicide. The editor tried to console her by telling about "the guy in the crowd" who "saved the President's life." "Turned out he was also gay. That's news, right? Now the whole country knows that too," the editor in the movie said. Billy Sipple died of natural causes, according to a coroner's spokeswoman, although the exact cause of death remains unknown. But his friends say he had been suffering from pneumonia. He had a pacemaker and had ballooned to 298 pounds, long ago losing his square-jawed good looks. Sipple was 47, but many believed him when, for some reason, he announced that he was 59 at a birthday party he threw for himself at Reflections three months ago -- and said it would be his last. About two weeks before his body was discovered, Sipple stopped in at the New Bell Saloon where he told bartender Frank Hagan that he had been by the Veterans Administration hospital, but was told to go home. A hospital spokesman said no record exists of such a visit. "I'm not a doctor, but I could tell he couldn't breathe," Hagan said. The bartender called him a cab and told him to phone a doctor when he got home. Sipple promised he would. "I believe that was the last anyone saw him," Hagan said. "The guy died in pain, with a bottle by his bed. That's pain. That's need for anesthetic," John Wahl said after Sipple's funeral, a simple affair last week attended by 30 people. Wahl was the lawyer who brought an unsuccessful invasion-of-privacy suit on Sipple's behalf against several newspapers, among them The Times. Back in 1975, another client of Wahl's, political activist Harvey Milk, a long-time friend of Sipple's, was making a name for himself by making a serious run for the Board of Supervisors, trying to organize gays and urging that they emerge from their closets. "Bill was part of that outreach. He was a guy who would do anything we asked -- cook, walk precincts," recalled Bob Ross, publisher of the weekly Bay Area Reporter. "Harvey's whole attitude was to show people that not everyone who was gay runs around with lipstick, high heels and a dress," Ross said. Sipple, the ex-Marine, seemed the perfect one to break down the myths. "This was an ordinary American citizen, and he was a gay man." The first press mention of Sipple's sexual orientation appeared on Sept. 24, 1975, two days after the attempt on Ford's life. San Francisco Chronicle columnist Herb Caen reported that Milk and another gay man "who claim to be among Sipple's close friends, describe themselves as 'proud -- maybe this will help break the stereotype.' " The item also noted that Sipple worked in Milk's supervisorial campaign. "In the gay press," recalled Ross, "we were happy to have a hero." But there was a problem. "Bill didn't want to be a hero," Ross said. Once the item appeared in Caen's column, the ramifications of Sipple's sexuality added a new twist for other reporters. When President Ford did not immediately thank Sipple, Milk told reporters that Sipple was being ignored because he was gay. Still, Sipple was evasive when reporters called. When headlines about his homosexuality reached his hometown of Detroit, the reason for Sipple's reluctance became apparent. His parents were shocked that he was being called a prominent member of San Francisco's gay community. "My father was too old, too stubborn. He couldn't change," said George Sipple, Bill's brother, a Detroit auto worker who came to San Francisco to arrange Bill's burial and clean his apartment. The estrangement between Sipple and his father was so deep that when his mother died in 1979, his father made it clear that he was not welcome. He could go to the funeral home or the cemetery, but not when his father was there, George Sipple recalled. Sipple stayed in San Francisco. "His personal life never should have made it back to Detroit," Sipple's brother added. In the years after he grabbed Moore, Sipple rarely discussed the incident, and downplayed his role when he did. He told his brother that he wasn't even thinking about the President when he grabbed the would-be assassin. He thought that for some reason she was going to shoot him. In his later years, however, several of his friends would say that when the liquor got him to talking, Sipple would boast about his heroism and inflate his service rank, telling people who would listen that he retired as a Marine colonel. The highest rank he attained was corporal. He was discharged as a private first-class. Though Sipple believed his notoriety led him to drink more heavily and ruined his life, his life apparently had long been troubled. He was a high-school drop-out, dyslexic and had been a drinker for years, he said. He was wounded twice in Vietnam, including once in the head, and lived on a 100% veteran's disability pension since his release from the Marines in 1970. The disability was for both psychological and physical reasons. The coroner's report noted that he was diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic. But although he lived on a veteran's pension, he never stopped being generous, his friends said. He would give at least $50 to any worthy charity, or help a Tenderloin derelict. "I have watched him split his last two dollars. Give one dollar to someone who needed a meal, and use the rest to buy himself a drink," Ross said. Sipple had come to San Francisco in 1970 knowing that he would be accepted as he never could be back home. But he never envisioned that word of his life style would travel back to his hometown, attorney Wahl said in explaining why Sipple decided to file suit after the publicity that followed his act of heroism. "There was a principle," Wahl said. "If someone is gay and wants to keep that fact private, then who the hell is Herb Caen or anyone else to say it's not a private fact?" Sipple's suit was thrown out by a superior court judge in San Francisco. The case dragged on until 1984 when a state court of appeal held that Sipple had indeed become news, and that his sexual orientation was part of the story. Although the papers won the suit, the Sipple story weighs on Daryl Lembke, then a reporter for The Times whose article was among the first to appear after Caen's column item. "It is a source of concern that will stay with me -- that I attempted to make Oliver Sipple a gay hero," Lembke said. "Instead, I helped estrange him from his mother. . . . If I had it to do it over again, I wouldn't." Caen doesn't have such second thoughts. In a brief phone conversation, he said: "It was a good item. Members of the gay community wanted it published to show they weren't all a bunch of wimps." Sipple nonetheless left a mark and that pleased him, said George Sipple, taking a break from cleaning his brother's apartment. George recalled that his brother once said that long after he died, "somebody will pick up a book and see Oliver Sipple saved President Ford's life." George Sipple felt sorry, however, that he could not honor his brother's wish that he be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. He was buried Wednesday at Golden Gate National Cemetery south of San Francisco. His brother also wondered why there had been no message of condolence from former President Ford. Penny Circle, Ford's chief of staff at his Palm Springs office, said the former President had been traveling since she learned of Sipple's death. "I couldn't get a hold of the President," she said, "and it just fell through the cracks."
19890302000000000	VAN NUYS MAN WHO RESCUED VICTIM OF ATTACK TO GET MEDAL. A 36-year-old Van Nuys man who risked his life to save another man from being stabbed to death was one of 19 people chosen to receive the Andrew Carnegie Medal for heroism. James Edward Fell is being honored for coming to the rescue of Eulalio Castellanos, 29, of Los Angeles in a stabbing attack Dec. 15, 1986, said Walter Rutkowski, secretary of the Andrew Carnegie Hero Fund Commission of Pittsburgh, Pa. Fell, who witnessed the assault while driving by in his car, came to the aid of Castellanos and was stabbed after he struck the assailant, Rutkowski said. Fell and Castellanos were hospitalized for their injuries and later recovered, Rutkowski said. Fell was notified about his award Friday in a letter from the Carnegie Commission, Rutkowski said. Fell and Castellanos were unavailable for comment Wednesday. In addition to a medal and a certificate, each of the 19 award recipients will receive a check for $2,500, Rutkowski said. The award was established by industrial magnet Andrew Carnegie in 1904 and is presented to recipients throughout the United States and Canada six times a year, Rutkowski said. Since the award's inception, about $17.7 million has been given to people who have aided others in life-threatening situations, he said.
19890407000000000	ORANGE COUNTY DIGEST / LOCAL NEWS IN BRIEF: SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO; 2 RESCUE DRIVER AFTER TRUCK HITS POWER LINE. A garbage truck driver was in critical condition Thursday after he was shocked by a high-voltage wire, authorities said. Jesus Garcia, 51, of Santa Ana was outside the truck using a hydraulic arm to lift a dumpster when it touched the live wire, sending 14,000 volts surging through the truck and into Garcia's body. The electricity knocked Garcia to the ground and blew out one of the vehicles front tires, Orange County Fire Department spokeswoman Patti Range said. Garcia's head hit the ground beneath a metal, electrified step on the truck, she said, and the vehicle began to sink toward him as the tire deflated. "Two workers ran to him and pulled him away from the truck," Range said. "They were lucky the dumpster sunk away from the power line" or they would have been shocked, too, she added. Garcia, who works for the Dewey Disposal Co., suffered third-degree burns on his shoulder where the electricity left his body, and second-degree burns elsewhere on his body. He was airlifted to UCI Medical Center in Orange, where he was listed in critical condition Thursday evening. The two men who saved him, Eric Rosauer, 19, of San Clemente, and Mark Grosse, 26, of Lake Elsinore, were working nearby at the California Silica Sand Co. on Ortega Highway when the accident occurred about 9:30 a.m. Range said that Rosauer and Grosse would be recommended for a special heroism award.
19890422000000000	FALLBROOK MAN SCOOPS 6 TODDLERS FROM FLAMES. It could have been an unusual though mundane event, an empty, burning car that draws a gazing crowd. Kevin Kereluik was one of several people who saw the melting car Thursday afternoon in the parking lot of El Camino North Shopping Center in Oceanside. But, instead of just staring, he decided to put out the fire. And it's a good thing he did, because the car wasn't empty. "The window of the car was open about an inch," said Kereluik, recalling his efforts to put out the flames. "I couldn't see anything because there was so much smoke. That's when I heard it. A child's voice screaming. "I almost panicked . . . right then it raced through my mind, 'My God, there's someone in the car,' " Kereluik said. "I just dropped the extinguisher that I had and opened the door. And that's when I saw the kids." According to authorities, Kereluik's heroic actions saved the lives of six toddlers: Cory Hiatt, 4; Danielle Hiatt, 2; Ashley Campbell, 2; Kyle Koets, 3; Brittany Cougler, 2, and Kevin Brusch, 2. "We had kind of a miracle here," senior Fire Inspector Tom Fitzgerald of the Oceanside Fire Department said. "You should have seen the car . . . a minute after Kereluik pulled them out, the car was completely engulfed in flames. If it wasn't for him, we would be talking about six obituary names instead." The six children, all from Oceanside and Vista, were taken to Tri-City Medical Center, where they were treated for smoke inhalation and released. None of the youngsters suffered any burns. The children were left in the car by their baby sitter, Rita Napier, a 36-year-old from Oceanside. She had left the children unattended about 1 p.m. Thursday while she went into a clothing store at the mall, according to Fitzgerald. Napier told authorities she was in the store less than five minutes. But, by the time she came out, she said, the car was on fire. Investigators contemplated charging Napier with child endangerment, but, since the fire was ruled accidental, no charges will be filed, according to Bob George, an Oceanside police spokesman. "Obviously, it was not right for her to leave them unattended," George said. "But the fire was not her doing. It was accidental." An electrical or gas line malfunction most likely started the fire, authorities said. The 31-year-old Kereluik, who lives in Fallbrook and serves as a supervisor for four McDonald's restaurants in Oceanside, was working at the shopping center when the fire broke out. "I noticed there were a lot of people watching this car in the parking lot," said Kereluik, who grabbed the restaurant's emergency fire extinguisher and told a co-worker to call 911. "I had no idea there was anybody in there," Kereluik. "I just wanted to keep the flames down until the fire department got there. There were a lot of cars nearby, and if it had exploded, it could have snowballed." Not only did Kereluik save a lot of cars; he saved precious lives. "I have a 3-year-old daughter myself," Kereluik said. "Her name is Elizabeth. If I ever came home from work and someone told me my baby was injured, let alone killed, I would be devastated. I think about these children's families, and I'm just glad I spared them that nightmare."
19890423000000000	CARNEGIE COMMISSION HONORS THOSE WHO RISK THEIR LIVES; MORE THAN A MEDAL, HEROISM AWARD HELPS PAY BRAVERY'S COSTS. When petite Gail Mazzetti Hooks saw two thugs beating a Houston police officer and going for his gun, she attacked with uncharacteristic fury -- scratching, kicking and punching -- until the two men fled. "I thought they were going to kill him," said Hooks, who had been watching from the restaurant where she worked as a waitress. "He had the prettiest face, but he was purple. I kept thinking, 'That could be my brother.' " Hooks ran after one of the bad guys until reality caught up with her on that warm, humid evening of April 20, 1986. Alone and shaking in an alley, she abandoned the chase, threw up in the bushes and hurried home to bed. Nevertheless, the Carnegie Hero Fund Commission proclaimed her a hero, and a forever-grateful Officer James Whitley sent her flowers. Hooks is one of 7,313 adults and children who have been honored by the commission since its founding in 1904 by industrialist Andrew Carnegie, who was moved by the bravery displayed following a mine explosion near Pittsburgh.  Cash and a Medal Carnegie heroes receive $2,500 and a bronze medal on which is inscribed the New Testament verse: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." The self-effacing Hooks, who moved out of Texas shortly after the fracas because one of the attackers remained at large, says she is uncomfortable being called a hero. "That was the way I was brought up," said Hooks, now 31 and living in Charlotte, N. C. "If you saw someone who needed help, you just helped them. You don't think about it, you just do it." To Whitley, however, Hooks and another waitress who came to his rescue deserve the honor. "I couldn't believe they tried to help me like that, when they could have easily gotten killed or hurt," said Whitley, 28, who is still on the Houston police force. "I probably wouldn't be here today if not for them." In establishing the fund, which he endowed with $5 million, Carnegie said he wasn't trying to "create heroism . . . knowing well that heroic action is impulsive."  Insurance for Courage He also said he wanted to make sure heroes or their survivors would not "suffer pecuniarily" as a result of their deeds. Paying for pensions, scholarships and funeral expenses "is where Carnegie has its real punch," commission spokesman Walter Rutkowski said. In 85 years, more than 63,000 people have been nominated for heroism awards, but just 7,313 of them, or about 11%, were chosen to receive them. "We are up to our whatever in nominees," said Rutkowski, whose office in downtown Pittsburgh is watched over by a somber portrait of Carnegie. "We give away as many awards as we have cases that meet our requirements." Nominees are scrutinized by three investigators before the commission's 21-member executive committee votes.  Just the Facts Like Sgt. Joe Friday of "Dragnet," the Carnegie investigators want to know just the facts. "In a drowning case, we go for the water temperature, the distance of the swim, the current and the rescuer's swimming ability," Rutkowski said. "We don't get into a person's psyche. "You cannot get emotionally tied up with these cases. You just don't have the capacity to see these cases other than clinically. It's like a doctor in the operating room. You don't want him to weep over the pain you're in." Candidates are excluded from consideration if they are obligated to act because of their occupation, such as lifeguard or firefighter. A rescue of a family member also is excluded, unless the rescuer was severely injured or killed. Above all, the saved person must have been in imminent danger of losing his life, and the hero must have risked his life in performing the rescue. Also, the deed must have taken place in the United States or Canada.  Posthumous Honors, Pensions More than 1,500 Carnegie heroes, or roughly 21%, died performing their rescues. Most of the heroic acts involve drownings or fires. Surprisingly, perhaps, a nominee can still be chosen for the honor even if the life-saving attempt failed. "It may sound crass, but we're not interested in the victim so much as the rescuer," Rutkowski said. "We're not a lifesaving award. We give awards to those who risk their own lives to save others." Carnegie heroes range in age from 8 to 80 and 91% have been males. Most are modest people who are hard-pressed to explain what prompted their actions, the investigators say. "I don't think anyone can truthfully claim to understand why anyone stands by or gets involved," said Marlin Ross, a Carnegie investigator since 1983.  Acting by Instinct To Carnegie hero Robert Jameson, a heroic act is done by instinct. "If you don't react immediately, you're going to be overwhelmed by what happens. You'll just freeze," said Jameson, 36, of Roebling, N. J., who last April saved a woman from a knife-wielding attacker. "It has nothing to do with bravery," said Andrew Mathieson, 60, of Pittsburgh, who was shot three times while defending his secretary, Jane Celender, on Feb. 19, 1986. "If you ask if I would attack a 210-pound man holding a gun, I would say, 'No, not consciously,' but if the circumstances would develop the same way again, I would probably do the same thing," he said. "I think the real brave people are those who have time to consider what they're going to do and still do it." Mary Ann Anderson, whose father, John, died trying to save a boy from drowning in Lake Michigan on July 17, 1987, said she has met several Carnegie heroes and all share one trait.  Concern for Others "They all have this fundamental concern for people, that what you do in life does matter and affect others," said Anderson, 24, of Baldwin, Mich. "Everyone wants to believe the best of them will come out, but no one knows what you are going to do in a situation like that. You either panic or you do something. It's your inner soul taking over." Anderson's death left not only an emotional void in his family's life but also a financial one. His three children were in college at the time, and there was little money to pay the bills. The Carnegie commission stepped in, paid the funeral expenses, set up a monthly stipend for Anderson's wife, Louise, and contributed scholarship money. "It was a blessing," said Louise Anderson, 42, a schoolteacher in Baldwin. "There were many bleak times when I didn't know if I was going to be able to make the bills." Of the 105 beneficiaries currently receiving pensions, Evelyn Sponsler of Everett, Pa., has been on the books the longest.  Pension Saved Family For 58 years she and her disabled daughter have been supported by a Carnegie pension awarded when her husband, Clarence, died trying to rescue a man who was overcome by fumes when he fell into a gasoline storage tank. "I probably would have had to live on welfare without it," said Sponsler, 82, who had three young children at the time her husband died. Last year, the commission gave out $236,000 in pensions. About $372,000 went toward the $2,500 hero awards, funeral expenses and to 20 scholarship recipients. What the hero often does not receive is praise from the person saved, commission investigators say. Jameson said the woman he saved never thanked him, but he can understand why. "This was a very violent thing that happened to her," he said. "She just wants to put it in her past and forget about it." Jane Celender, 42, the Pittsburgh secretary who owes her life to Mathieson's quick actions, said that thanks seemed inadequate. "How can you say thank you for your life?" she asked.
19890503000000000	REPEATED THEME OF RESCUERS WHO BRAVED FIRE: 'WE'D DO IT AGAIN'. Todd Barbey was on his way to play tennis last November when he rounded a bend in Pacific Beach and came upon flames leaping skyward. In a burning car he saw the silhouette of the driver trying to escape. The driver had been going about 70 m.p.h. when she missed a curve on Soledad Mountain Road and crashed into a motor home, setting off a chain-reaction crash and fire. Barbey, a 41-year-old Pacific Beach resident, didn't hesitate. He stopped his van and ran across the street. He said his only thought as he went to the woman's aid was, "God help me." The driver got out of the car, but left behind was an unconscious and bleeding passenger. Barbey broke a window and pulled the 17-year-old girl to safety. On Tuesday night, Barbey and 21 other heroes were honored at the San Diego Burn Institute's 16th annual Spirit of Courage award banquet. The awards are given to people who risk their lives attempting to save others from fiery deaths, said Judith Copeland, executive director of the Burn Institute. Barbey, who is studying to become a minister, said his attempt to save the girl was instinctual. "I was thinking about once every three seconds that something was going to explode or burn us up, and I knew I had to go as fast as possible. . . . I was totally geared on getting her out, and I'm glad God put me together to do it," Barbey said. Copeland said that Barbey's response to danger is typical of the more than 180 heroes the institute has honored in the past. Barbey "was surrounded by fire on three sides. It was truly heroic. But they always say to us, 'We'd do it again in a moment, I'm not a hero. I did a job that had to be done.' That's been a common thread. They're always so humble . . . . I think Todd Barbey's (story) is pretty incredible." Copeland added that a special honor, the Exceptional Service Award, will be given to Victor Gonzalez, Mark Grow, David Lones, Forrest Kuhn and Andrew Parr of the Lakeside Fire Department. The five were almost killed June 10, 1988, when a burning house began to collapse as they were trying to rescue a man and woman trapped inside, Copeland said. They got the woman out and "stayed inside an absolute inferno to get a man out," Copeland said.
19890504000000000	SAN GABRIEL VALLEY DIGEST: PASADENA; D.A. HONORS 3 RESIDENTS. Three residents from Azusa, Covina and Pasadena who helped in the arrests of crime suspects were among eight Los Angeles-area residents honored by Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner on Monday. The fifth annual Courageous Citizens Award ceremony held at Pasadena Superior Court is part of an on-going program to recognize civilians who assist in the capture or conviction of criminals. Diana Jean LaFrenierre, 40, of Azusa was driving home in 1987 when she saw a man hovering over a body in Los Angeles. When the man drove away with an accomplice, LaFrenierre gave chase at speeds exceeding 80 m.p.h. until both cars were stopped by police. Her testimony later helped obtain murder convictions of both men. Patrick M. Clisham, 43, of Covina witnessed a sexual assault in a Covina laundry one night in 1987 and noted the license plate number of the suspect's car as he fled. Police later arrested the man. Robert Nembhard , 35, an RTD driver from Pasadena and Jose Lechuga, 23, of Los Angeles chased two suspects who robbed a 76-year-old man on a bus last year. Their testimony helped obtain convictions.
19890528000000000	NEWSWIRE. Jerry Anderson, who played briefly for the Cincinnati Bengals and Tampa Bay Buccaneers, drowned after pulling two boys out of a rain-swollen river at Murfreesboro, Tenn. Police officer Bill Todd said rescue workers pulled Anderson from the lake and took him to a local medical center, but efforts to revive him failed. Five years ago, Anderson helped Tulsa, Okla., residents who were trapped in buildings and cars during a flood. He was honored by the city for his heroic actions.
19890601000000000	EX-L.A. OFFICER GIVES UP HIS LIFE TO SAVE FILM CREW. Allan DeLapp, 60, a retired Los Angeles police officer, died a hero early Wednesday morning when a hit-run driver hurled him into the pavement as he was leading a film crew through Koreatown. Astride a motorcycle, DeLapp was escorting the crew riding along 7th Street when a driver sped through a stop sign at Oxford Avenue and slammed into DeLapp, police said. The camera crew said DeLapp spied the driver in time to save the film crew from harm by using his motorcycle as a roadblock, according to the production company's attorney, Lori Todd. "He saw the oncoming vehicle and apparently turned his motorcycle sideways and took the brunt of it," Todd said. "Needless to say, that is an heroic act. "People felt he saved their lives. Literally, that is what I keep hearing," said Todd, who added that the workers were too distraught to talk about the accident with a reporter. The suspect, Antonio Harold Rosas, 21, a Colombian native living in Los Angeles, was found hiding in nearby bushes about an hour after the accident occurred at 2:30 a.m. Police, who booked Rosas on suspicion of murder, said he was drunk at the time, with a a blood-alcohol level of .21, more than twice the legal limit. The crew had been shooting scenes for a movie entitled "Dead Men Don't Die," which stars Elliot Gould. The comedy, featuring zombies and a newsroom, is the first film by Waymar Productions. Wednesday's shoot was canceled because of the accident, Todd said.  Increased His Speed Witnesses said they thought DeLapp, of Torrance, might have been alive today except for the inexplicable actions of the driver. After Rosas allegedly struck DeLapp, horrified spectators watched as he increased his speed, pinning DeLapp against the hood of the car, police said. The driver "collided head-on with the officer, then accelerated for some reason, thinking perhaps that the accelerator was the brake," Sgt. Bill Page said. The car sped 150 to 200 feet east down 7th Street before hitting a parked car and a curb and rolling over DeLapp, police said. Two members of the film crew grabbed the suspect, but he fled after they joined colleagues who were attempting to lift the suspect's car off DeLapp's chest. DeLapp died at the scene, police said. Later, members of the crew, communicating with walkie-talkies, dashed through the neighborhood looking for the driver, said Lisa Samia, who watched the scene from her apartment balcony. "Their voices were trembling," Samia said. "When they knew he was dead, the ladies were hugging each other."  Found Hiding in Bushes A police dog found Rosas hiding in a row of bushes near a parking lot a short distance from the accident scene. Samia said Rosas, who appeared curled up in a fetal position, was grabbed by the back of his shirt by police and carried as if he were a piece of luggage. Rosas was treated at County-USC Medical Center for treatment of facial injuries and booked there. DeLapp retired as a motorcycle officer from the Los Angeles Police Department in 1969 after an accident permanently damaged his knee, said Monica Cameron, one of DeLapp's three daughters. He worked for awhile at a drilling rig company and ran his own mechanic's shop, but was eventually drawn back to his love of motorcycles. He found working as a motorcycle officer for the studios during the last eight years an ideal job and took great pride in his two motorcycles, which he constantly washed and polished, Cameron said. "This was a good thing for him to get into. He still had a little action," Cameron added. "He loved it. You couldn't get him off his motorcycle," she said. "I knew he'd die on his motorcycle."
19890720000000000	'GOD OPENED A HOLE' AFTER JET LANDED UPSIDE DOWN. Jerry Schemmel had escaped the burning United Airlines DC-10 after it crashed here Wednesday and found safety in a cornfield. But he heard the cries of a baby coming from the smoking wreckage and he plunged back into the airplane. "I found her -- a baby girl -- in an overhead compartment, beneath a bunch of stuff, and pulled her out," Schemmel, 29, said after he had been examined and released from a Sioux City hospital. "By that time it (the plane) was filled with smoke and I just ran with her. I ran down one of the corn rows." Another survivor, Charles Martz, described how he staggered from the plane into a cornfield that had been transformed into a nightmare. "Bodies were strewn all over the place," Martz said. "Bodies had burns, their clothing burned off, stripped off." Similar tales of heroism and horror were told by survivors who were on Flight 232, bound from Denver to Chicago, when it crashed, broke up and erupted in flames as it attempted an emergency landing in Iowa. "The plane came down. It bounced twice, flipped into the air and we were sitting there upside down and it began to fill up with smoke," said Cliff Marshall, who was returning home to Columbus, Ohio. "Then God opened a hole in the basement (the bottom of the plane) and I pushed a little girl out. I grabbed another, kept pulling them out until they didn't come no more." Half or more of the 293 passengers and crew members on the airplane survived and many of them walked away from the flaming remains of the wide-bodied jet. C.O. Miller, a former chief investigator for the National Safety Transportation Board, called the survival rate remarkable. James Hamilton, an official at a local hospital, said it was amazing that people walked away from the wreckage unscathed. The early-afternoon flight was about halfway from Denver to Chicago when the passengers heard what several described as a big jolt or bump followed by a bang. The sound of the three-engine plane changed. "The pilot got on the speaker system and said that one of the engines had blown, that there was nothing to worry about, that there were two other engines, that we wouldn't have any problem," said Schemmel, deputy commissioner of the Continental Basketball Assn., who was on his way to Columbus, Ohio, with another league official.  Damages Tail A few minutes later the captain told the passengers that the engine explosion had damaged the tail of the aircraft and that they would have to land in Sioux City, a city of about 80,000 in northwestern Iowa. The pilot told the passengers that the landing probably would be a little rough because he did not have a lot of control over the aircraft. The passengers were not told that pieces of the engine apparently had severed the hydraulic controls, leaving the pilot almost completely unable to maneuver the huge jet. The pilot reported by radio to air traffic controllers that he had sustained a complete hydraulic failure. The plane descended gradually to about 11,000 feet and began to circle the Sioux City airport while emergency crews were assembled on the ground. Aboard the aircraft, there was no panic. The flight attendants told the passengers how to prepare for an emergency landing by putting their heads between their legs. The crew described how to evacuate the plane from all available exits. The in-flight movie continued to play on the screens in the cabin. "I was not aware of the danger," Schemmel said. "I don't know much about flying, but I certainly heard a lot of stories about one engine quitting and there being no problem. So I wasn't worried about it."  Struggle to Cope The plane kept dipping, pitching and circling in one direction as the pilot and co-pilot struggled to cope with the hydraulic failure. "For 35 minutes, we knew something was wrong and for 10 or 15 minutes we knew something was dramatically wrong," said Brad Bayless of Highlands, Colo., as he stood in the lobby of the airport terminal after the crash. David Lansberger told a television interviewer: "Everybody was pretty calm. We really thought we were going to land and walk off. They said it was going to be a real hard landing. I didn't think it was going to be this hard." Martz, 58, is a former Navy pilot who still flies for his personal business. In a telephone call to his wife in Castle Rock, Colo., he praised the pilot's ability in bringing the crippled plane so close to the ground. He said that his experience as a pilot told him that the problems were probably far more serious than the pilot was telling the passengers as the plane circled the airport. "I could tell it was worse than that," he said. About 40 minutes after the engine explosion, the pilot told passengers to get in position for the landing. He said that the plane would touch down in about 30 seconds. Three or four minutes later, as the plane aimed for a 9,000-foot runway at the airport and emergency crews watched in horror, the right wing dipped into the ground. "We did somersaults," recalled Bayless, who was seated directly next to the right wing. Another passenger seated near the front of the aircraft told a local radio station: "When we hit, the plane broke right in front of me. It rolled over twice, I think, then it burst into flames. I grabbed an old lady in front of me and a baby and I went out of the plane." Schemmel was seated on the aisle in row 26. Next to him was Jay Ramsdell, the commissioner of the basketball league. "The section we were in rolled over at least twice," said Schemmel. "It might have been more than that. It happened so fast I don't remember. "After we first hit, we stopped in a very short time. It seemed like seconds. I was expecting to be sliding for a long time, but we stopped suddenly because we were in a cornfield. "When we came to a stop, I was upside down in my seat. I unbuckled my seat belt and fell to what would be the roof, because we were turned over. I found out that I was fine and I started helping other people. I looked to my right, there were flames coming out of the wall." Several passengers described the first frantic seconds after the plane came to a halt. Some rushed for the openings and others fought to rescue as many people as they could. Lansberger said the calm before the crash turned into pandemonium, with noise and screams everywhere. "I just remember thinking, 'This is what it is like to die,' " he told CNN television. "We tried to get as many people out before the fire hit," said Bayless in the airport lobby, massaging a bump on his head. "I saw fire out of my window right away." Rod Vettor echoed Bayless, saying: "We ended up upside down in a cornfield with fire. We did everything we could to get people out of the airplane." Lori and Mark Michaelson were traveling with their infant daughter and 6-year-old son in Row 11. They unbuckled their seat belts and, in the confusion and smoke and fire, they left the plane without the baby. "I went back in the plane to find my daughter," Mark Michaelson told a TV interviewer. "I couldn't see her because it was dark. I heard her cry. I knew it was her cry but I couldn't hear it again. Others were coming out. I was walking forward shouting: 'I'm looking for my baby.' At that point the smoke got worse." He left the plane, searching for the rest of his family.  Grabs Young Boy Ron Rhode of Columbus, Ohio, was riding next to an 8-year-old boy from Prairie View, Ill. He grabbed the child and held him tight as the plane bounced and flipped over on the ground. "The plane hit, bounced and we ended up upside down," said Rhode. "I let him go." The boy, Ben Radtke, was unharmed. He was still wearing the red-and-white badge that United gives to minors traveling alone. Schemmel lives in Denver, but he is a native of Sioux Falls. He worked for a time as a basketball broadcaster before joining the Continental Basketball Assn. "He is so calm," said his wife, Diane, in a telephone interview from their home. "He is just a really mellow person." As the plane filled with smoke, Schemmel tried in vain to put out part of the fire in his broken section with a blanket and then saw sunlight through the darkening cabin. "There was an opening," he recalled. "Everybody was heading for the back of the plane where the opening was. So I helped some people out for as long as I could, when the flames just got too heavy and I had to get out. It was chaos. "I got outside the plane. It was right in the cornfield. I had gotten a few feet out and heard a baby crying, and so I went back in," he said. Inside the plane, wedged in an overhead bin, he found the infant girl and carried her out of the plane. "I ran down one of the corn rows," he said. "The corn stalks were about seven feet tall and I couldn't really see anything. I got to a little bit of a clearing and I handed the baby to a lady who looked like she was all right. She took the baby and took off toward the road." Outside the plane, Michaelson spotted a woman carrying his baby daughter. He ran up to her and she said that a man had just handed her the child. He said he didn't know who brought his baby off the plane. "Just some hero," he said. Penelope McMillan reported from Los Angeles and J. Michael Kennedy reported from Sioux City; staff writer Douglas Frantz contributed to this story from Los Angeles.
19890827000000000	MAN IN BANK SAVES DEPUTY FROM ATTACKER. A bank customer in Palmdale became an instant hero Saturday when he jumped into a fistfight to save a sheriff's deputy who was being choked by a length of cord from his police radio, authorities said. The customer, Lee Bibbie of Altadena, enabled veteran Deputy Dennis Bernard to free himself from the grasp of a suspected check forger in a fight at a Security Pacific bank, Deputy Ronald Thomason of the Antelope Valley/Lancaster Sheriff's Department station said. The suspect, Cedric A. Brown, 35, of Los Angeles, had pinned Bernard to the floor and had tightened the radio cord around his neck for about 30 seconds before Bibbie came to the deputy's aid, Thomason said. Brown, identified by police as a recent parolee on a drug conviction, was arrested moments later when more deputies arrived. He was booked on suspicion of forgery and attempted murder of a police officer, Thomason said. "Bibbie intervening at that particular time perhaps saved Bernard's life," the sheriff's spokesman said. "The fight may have turned out quite differently if Bibbie had not intervened. Had (the suspect) been able to choke (the deputy) unconscious for just for a second, he would have had time to grab the gun out of the holster." Police said the incident began when Brown tried to deposit a suspicious check for $550 and a bank manager notified the sheriff's station. When Bernard, a 14-year police veteran, entered the bank, Brown tried to flee, Thomason said. Bernard chased Brown and the two ran into a locked door. In the fight that followed, the 6-foot, 2-inch suspect allegedly struck the 5-foot, 10-inch deputy several times in the face and attempted to take the officer's 9-millimeter handgun. At one point, Thomason said, the deputy threw the suspect onto a desk, but the officer's momentum carried him and the suspect over the desktop and onto the floor. The suspect landed on top and was able to grab the microphone and cord from Bernard's portable police radio, Thomason said. "He wrapped it around Bernard's throat and tried to choke him to death," the spokesman said. "Bernard had backup (officers) rolling. The backups were maybe two, three minutes away. But it only takes two or three seconds for something to go tragically wrong." Bibbie, who helped to subdue the suspect in the crucial moments before backup officers arrived, was not injured. He was believed to be the only customer in the bank at the time, and was waiting to open an account because he is moving to Palmdale, police said. A manager and two tellers were on duty, Thomason said.
19891012000000000	QUE PASA?; PEOPLE AND EVENTS. Humberto Luna is considered to be morning disc jockeys Rick Dees and Jay Thomas rolled into one. His new, $5-million, five-year contract -- the highest for a disc jockey in Spanish-language radio -- gives him a salary to match. "I'm well paid, but it makes me uncomfortable because I'm identified with the average person, the average Mexican," said Luna, 41, a native of Zacatecas. "I don't want to seem presumptuous, but I appreciate that they're recognizing my work after 20 years on the air." Luna's madcap antics during the 6 to 11 a.m. morning drive-time has brought KTNQ into the top 10 Los Angeles stations in the Arbitron ratings. "That's why we were so anxious to sign him," said KTNQ general manager Ken Wolt. Ruben Ortega became a hero at San Gabriel High School when he wrested a semiautomatic rifle from a fellow student who was holding him and 69 other students hostage in a classroom last year. "I was afraid," Ortega said, "but I was just trying to get the gun away from him." Now, Ortega of Alhambra is also a hero to President Bush, who has awarded him a 1988 Young American Medal for Bravery. For singer Tony Melendez, life irrevocably changed "when the Pope jumped off the stage and we touched with a kiss. He kind of rubbed a little of his charisma off on me -- and maybe a little responsibility of the church." Born without arms, Melendez, 29, of Chino, plays guitar with his feet. Since John Paul II's kiss at the Universal Amphitheatre in 1987, Melendez has practiced a kind of ministry -- "singing my music and just trying to give people hope." His biography, "The Gift of Hope," will be published this year, and readers, he said, "will see this guy with no arms leading a very normal life." EDWARD J. BOYER
19891026000000000	SAN GABRIEL VALLEY DIGEST: REGIONAL; 6 HEROIC CITIZENS HONORED. Lee Bibbie of Altadena, who saved a Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy last August, was among six people whose heroism was recognized Monday in a "Courageous Citizens Award" ceremony at the Van Nuys Courthouse. Bibbie saved the deputy after an assailant struck him and tried to strangle him in a Palmdale bank. The attacker was convicted of forgery and sentenced to four years in prison, authorities said. Evelyn Jones, 42, of Pasadena, who jumped into her car and chased a young man on a bicycle who had stolen her purse, also was honored. Jones eventually flagged down a patrolman, who arrested the thief. Four men were honored for participating in the capture and disarming of a robber: Samuel Luffman, 65, who was with his 97-year-old father when they were held up; Steven Kelley, a Sherman Oaks church custodian, and Antonio Perez and John Vallejo, employees of a Sun Valley termite extermination company. Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner presented the awards.
19891109000000000	SAN GABRIEL VALLEY DIGEST: WEST COVINA; 7 HEROES GET CHP AWARD. Seven motorists who saved the lives of four people trapped in a burning car on the freeway will receive community service awards from the California Highway Patrol today. They are Alvin Daniels, 32, Rancho Cucamonga; Roger Middleton, 35, Alhambra; Raul Mata, 30, West Covina; Alfonso Alvarado Jr., 20, Los Angeles; Richard Marshall, 26, San Bernardino; Salvador Araujo, 37, Los Angeles, and Pete Mena, 30, West Covina. The seven were in separate vehicles when they witnessed a two-car collision July 6 blocking three eastbound lanes of the San Bernardino Freeway in West Covina, said CHP spokesman Trany Morton. They rushed to the accident and pulled five people from one of the cars, which had burst into flames, Morton said. The occupants of the second car had apparently managed to get out on their own, he said. One of the victims died later of internal injuries. But Morton said the seven Good Samaritans saved the lives of Maria Godinez, 30, Pomona; her daughter, Yesenia, 12; her son, Rogelio, 6, and another passenger, Rosa Palamino, 15.
19900113000000000	JONA H. TAYLOR; CARNEGIE HERO FUND NOMINEE. Jona H. Taylor, 87, a retired bakery company founder who twice risked his life to rescue neighbors whose homes were ablaze in Leisure World Laguna Hills. In the first instance in January, 1967, Taylor suffered serious burns while rushing five times into nearby homes to pull three residents to safety after two Marine Corps jets had crashed. In April, 1968, two days after being honored in Orange County for the first exploit, he pulled a woman from a house fire started by a burning cigarette. Afterward he was nominated for a Carnegie Hero Fund award. In Laguna Hills on Sunday.
19900221000000000	RESCUER'S DEATH IS DARK DAY FOR SUNNYSLOPE. Most of his friends figured he would die a hero, because when disaster erupted in the eastern Sierra Nevada, Vidar Anderson was almost always there. Forest fires, plane crashes, mountain rescues -- these were like a call to arms for Anderson, 58, a volunteer member of the Long Valley Fire Department. Tall and wiry, the retired school bus driver would invariably be the first on the scene. He was aggressive, friends and colleagues said, selfless, and ever calm in the face of danger. "He was fearless," Ray Turner, a fellow firefighter, recalled Tuesday as he sat in the local fire station, weary, grimy and subdued. "He would risk his life in a minute." On Monday, Anderson met his match on the treacherous, frozen surface of Convict Lake. As he struggled to reach others drowning in the frigid waters, Anderson crashed through the ice, slipping into the dark of the mountain lake. A diver from the June Lake search and rescue team managed to slide a rubber boat across the ice and save another would-be rescuer, Cris Baitx, but Anderson had dropped from sight before he could be reached. News of his death struck like a painful spasm in Sunnyslope, a small community just south of Mammoth Lakes where Anderson lived with his wife and one of his two daughters, and in neighboring towns. The loss of this beloved man -- described as the "classic good Samaritan" by one friend -- seemed unfathomable. "Damn, I hate to hear this," said Ed Cereda as he brushed back tears and kicked a boulder of ice outside the general store he manages in Tom's Place, a tiny town along U.S. 395. "There are only so many of those kind of guys around," Turner said. "Maybe he was the only one we had. Now we've lost him. It's a hell of a loss." A former Encino resident, Anderson moved with his wife, Ruth, and daughters to the Mammoth Lakes area in 1980. The region was ideal for Anderson, an avid hunter and outdoorsman. The family settled in Sunnyslope, where Anderson built a two-story house and landed a job driving buses for a local school district. Anderson -- whose lean face was distinguished by what one friend described as "permanent smile lines" -- became a familiar figure around town. He was the type who loved to stop and chat. "He was always out and around," recalled Paul Burns, a deputy with the Mono County Sheriff's Department. "You'd talk to him at the doughnut shop, at fire scenes." Anderson's reputation for selflessness was well-known. After a hunting trip, he would share whatever meat he brought back with local nursing homes and needy families, friends recalled. In 1982, Anderson joined the volunteer fire department, and he proved to be a gung-ho member. He typically beat everyone else to a disaster scene -- including a fiery plane crash that killed three people last month -- and often took a lead role in risky rescue operations. After retiring recently from the school district, his work with the fire department increased. "Either he or I was always the first on the scene of an accident," Burns said. Another friend recalled that Anderson "always liked to be the guy on the nozzle" of a fire hose. As divers prowled beneath the ice on a grisly search for Anderson's body Tuesday, friends acknowledged that they often feared he would lose his life while seeking to save another. "He was not the kind of guy we ever thought was going to die in a nursing home of old age," Turner said. His daughter, Tina Anderson, 38, agreed. And, despite her grief, she said she is proud of all her father accomplished. "I'm glad he died a hero," she said. Warren reported from Los Angeles and Sappell from Sunnyslope.
19900223000000000	CAMP O'NEAL HAS HISTORY OF VIOLATING STATE RULES. Camp O'Neal, the youth facility in charge of three teen-agers who died in the Convict Lake tragedy, has been repeatedly cited over the last two years for violating state licensing standards -- including improperly supervising and medicating residents, failing to train staff adequately and supplying inadequate clothing for youngsters. "There have been some pretty chronic problems there," said Kathleen Norris, public information officer for the state Department of Social Services, the agency responsible for licensing private group homes for troubled youngsters, such as Camp O'Neal. Norris said that the camp had shown some improvement in the last year and no action to revoke its license is being taken. Bobbi Trott, camp director, said that the facility is the victim of unfair and overzealous inspectors working out of the state's licensing office in Riverside. "I think we have a chronic problem with the local agency," she said. An official of Mono County, where the camp is located in the Eastern Sierra, said local youngsters are no longer sent to Camp O'Neal partly because of its alleged problems with the care and treatment of the disturbed delinquent boys it serves. Probation department officials in Tulare and San Bernardino counties, who have sent youngsters to the camp, have praised the facility and said they were not aware of chronic problems cited by licensing authorities. Licensing officials said that the camp has had chronic troubles but declined to compare the facility to others in the state. State licensing reports of alleged violations over a three-year period at Camp O'Neal make up scores of pages in a two-inch-thick file. By comparison, a six-year file on Boys Republic, a Chino facility for delinquent youth which is also inspected by officials from Riverside County, makes up about 10 pages. The Boys Republic houses 151 youths, whereas Camp O'Neal's capacity is 34. State and local authorities continued their investigation into Monday's incident in which seven drowned. There have been no allegations that camp personnel were responsible for the tragedy. On Thursday, Trott disclosed that one of the youngsters who died in the frigid waters of Convict Lake had been diagnosed as having a condition that made him "manic, extremely hyperactive with poor impulse control." The youngster, with three others, had strayed from a group of 16 camp residents, who were on an outing under the supervision of two counselors, one of whom was working his first day on the job, Trott said. As the youngsters strayed toward the center of the lake, the new counselor, Randy Porter, tried to warn them that the ice was not safe, according to camp spokesmen. Four youths plunged through the ice as Porter and veteran counselor Dave Meyers went to their aid and also fell through the ice. Two other would-be rescuers also went down. One youngster survived, but the others perished. Asked why a hyperactive, impulsive youngster was allowed to go on an outing at the potentially dangerous lake, Terry Christensen, a member of the camp's board of directors, said: "The kid had begun to make improvements." Camp officials have hired a Newport Beach public relations firm, Professional Image, which on Thursday issued to local newspapers a press release lauding the behavior of counselors on the ice. "The ratio of supervision here was one (counselor) to eight (students)," the release read. "One of the victims' parents told me his child was never so happy in his life as he was with us." Benjamin Epstein of Professional Image said he was contacted by camp officials Wednesday. "They were very concerned," Epstein said. " . . . The impression everyone is left with when they see a story like this is there was irresponsibility in some way on the part of the camp and camp counselors. "The rescue efforts were heroic. That's the part they want people to understand -- they haven't done anything wrong." Privately run facilities for delinquents such as Camp O'Neal are inspected annually by state licensing officials who also make visits if complaints are received. Inspectors monitor the quality of housing, clothing, food, clients' rights, medical care and other services provided by the facility. If the care is not up to standard, the facility is cited for a "deficiency" and fined if the violation is not corrected or if the transgression is considered especially serious. Last month, licensing officials accused Camp O'Neal of tranquilizing youngsters against their will. "Clients are provided psychotropic drugs to mask (control) such behavior as aggressiveness, hyperactivity, etc.," the report said. It also said such policy is against state regulations. Trott maintains that the state inspector, Paul Zimmer, is not qualified to reach conclusions regarding improper medications and that he had not reviewed the clients' medical files. She said one-third of the youngsters in the camp are on medication and many came there already using such drugs. During the same visit last month, the state inspector reported that youngsters were inadequately clothed. Trott said that the inspector thought the youths looked like "ragamuffins" because "shredded jeans are in style." She said the camp attempted to buy adequate clothing, but that some of the youngsters demanded expensive acid-washed jeans. The camp was cited for lack of supervision last December when an inspector discovered that a resident had attempted sexual acts with nine other youths. "It is evident that the staff were lacking in care and supervision if this one client was able to (attempt to) commit so many acts of sodomy and oral copulation . . .," the report said. "We got rid of the kid," Trott said, adding that it is not feasible to provide a staff member to supervise each child. The facility also was cited for inadequate staffing in 1988 when 21 incidents were reported of youths leaving the grounds without permission. Trott maintained that several of those "AWOLs" were the same youth running out the door and explained that camp personnel are not allowed to physically prevent youngsters from leaving. Both state officials and former staff members complained that the camp does not provide adequate training to deal with the troubled delinquent youngsters it serves. In February, 1988, the camp was cited by the state because it allegedly had "no plan for orientation, development and training of staff." "The money that was coming in, I couldn't see it going back to the kids or to staff training," said Lynn Morris, a child care supervisor at the camp who left in October, 1988, because of his dissatisfaction. Trott said new staff members receive on-the-job training and an hour of instruction per week. Mono County turned over the camp, which had been run by its probation department, to Camp O'Neal Inc. in March, 1987, after officials decided the facility was too expensive to run. Trott, who had overseen the camp as a probation department employee, became the secretary of the new nonprofit corporation and continued to run the facility. Tim Christensen, who helped arrange the transfer from the county, serves as vice chairman. In September, 1987, after the county withdrew school services to the camp, Christensen said he was forced to open his own school on the grounds and established the for-profit High Sierra School. Christensen and Trott were married the next month. Youngsters sent to the camp by various counties are deemed in need of special education and attend the school run by Christensen. Camp O'Neal charges $32,220 per client per year and High Sierra School charges $30,960. Some former employees and critics of the camp said that Trott and Christensen have a financial incentive to keep the camp beds filled and to expand by accepting clients regardless of whether they are amenable to treatment. Alice Watkins, a former office aide at the camp, said that when the camp had difficulty filling its beds, Trott began to accept more severely troubled boys. Watkins, who was at the camp for 13 months, said she resigned because of her dissatisfaction with the way the camp was run. But, Christensen said: "We are here to help the kids. We take a child because we feel we can work with him. . . . We don't take violent or heavy-duty kids. We take kids that need a break and a highly structured environment. Unfortunately we don't succeed with everyone."
19900512000000000	.
19900513000000000	OFFICER CITED POSTHUMOUSLY FOR HEROISM IN SHIP'S FIRE. A naval officer received a hero's tribute for alerting sleeping sailors on the Conyngham and leading them to safety during a shipboard fire in which he was killed. Lt. Cmdr. Algernon Pope Gordon Jr. was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal on Friday. It is given for acts of heroism not involving actual conflict with an opposing armed force.
19900519000000000	ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; LOCAL CHP OFFICER GETS MEDAL OF VALOR. An Orange County California Highway Patrol officer who pulled a Seal Beach police officer from a burning squad car has been awarded the Medal of Valor, California's highest honor for its employees. Officer Michael Bernardin, assigned to the CHP's Westminster office, was one of six CHP officers given the award in a Sacramento ceremony on Friday, CHP spokesman Sam Haynes said. The other recipients are state traffic officers Robert Welch, assigned to the Fresno area; Jeffrey Jones, the Indio area; Matthew Causie, the Ventura area; Javier Rocha, the San Francisco area; and John Meaders, the Verdugo Hills area. The Medal of Valor is given for an extraordinary act of heroism by a state employee, undertaken at great risk in an effort to save human life. Since the medal was first awarded, in 1959, it has gone to 67 members of the California Highway Patrol, including those honored today. Bernardin earned the honor for bravery during an Aug. 23, 1988, traffic accident involving an unidentified Seal Beach police officer. When Bernardin arrived at the scene, he found the unconscious officer trapped inside his burning squad car. Bernardin tried to douse the flames with a fire extinguisher but, after that attempt, he enlisted the help of two citizens to try to pull the victim out of the burning vehicle. Despite the screams of witnesses trying to warn him stay away from the intense heat, Bernardin cut the seat belt loose and dragged the officer to safety. About 20 seconds later, the police car was engulfed in flames. The Seal Beach officer later died from massive head injuries. Bernardin suffered minor smoke inhalation, but had no lasting injuries. JAMES M. GOMEZ
19900602000000000	BASHFUL HERO PULLS MOTHER, UNCLE FROM FIRE. When flames broke out in his Chula Vista home early Friday, 17-year-old Manuel Cole knocked down two doors to rescue his mother and uncle minutes before the fire engulfed the house. Nobody was injured in the blaze, and his brother and neighbors are calling Manuel a hero for his actions. Manuel said he believes a cigarette started the fire in the master bedroom occupied by his mother, Marina Gallegos. When Manuel heard his mother screaming, he tried to enter the room, but the door was locked. "I looked under the door and saw the reflection of the flames," he said. "I knocked the door down with my shoulder. . . . When I got it open, I noticed the bed was on fire, so I pulled her out." Manuel said he hit the door "at least seven times" before it broke open. After leading his mother outside, he re-entered the home to get his uncle, Frank Gallegos, who also lived in the house. "I couldn't breathe, so I had to go out and come back in because the smoke was too thick," Manuel said. After a breath of fresh air, he broke down his uncle's door and led him to safety. He entered again for the last time in a futile attempt to douse the fire with the bathroom shower hose. The only possessions Manuel said he saved were the clothes he was wearing and his wallet. Meanwhile, his brother, Ricardo Cole, 16, had awakened by the noise and was at a neighbor's house telephoning for help. The Chula Vista Fire Department responded to the call at 1:20 a.m., Capt. George Smith said. The fire, in the 1600 block of Banner Avenue, spread rapidly and was extinguished by 1:50 p.m., he said. Damage was estimated at $150,000 to the home and $6,000 to two cars in the driveway. Three dogs died in the fire. When the Fire Department "got there, fire was coming out of all the front windows and the front door," Smith said. The building was a "total loss." The incident is under investigation as "suspicious," which means arson is probably not the cause of the fire, but it has not been ruled out, Smith said. "We believe it was caused by smoking materials," he said. Robert Gonzalez, 12, said he saw the blaze from his home, two houses away on Zenith Street. His grandmother, Jenny Gonzalez, also called the Fire Department. "I opened the door and looked out and saw the flames, and I said, 'Oh my God,"' Robert said. Ricardo Cole said he doubts that his uncle would have survived if Manuel had not helped him. "I don't think so, because my uncle sleeps a lot and sleeps with the radio on," Ricardo said. "Something blew up. In five minutes, everything was up (in flames). It went up fast. We were fixing the house, we had new furniture, and it just went up." Manuel said that, during the rescue, he was "worried, but not scared." For now, the family is living with neighbors. Manuel, a student at Castle Park High School, said that, in a few days, he will go live with friends in Tijuana until his family's life returns to normal. He bashfully told his story as he wandered through the charred shell of the house. Singed oranges hung overhead on a tree and a partly melted dirt bike lay on the patio. Friends and his brother, Ricardo, encouraged him to claim credit for his heroism, but he refused. Manuel skipped school Friday but went to work as usual in the afternoon, selling flowers on the street. Being a hero was one of the last things on his mind, at least until he was reminded of it by friends, neighbors and the media.
19900628000000000	LOCAL; HEROISM MEDAL FOR ANGELENO. The latest recipients of a Carnegie Medal for heroism include a 23-year-old Los Angeles man who was hurt while rescuing a youth from a gang, it was announced today. Teacher's assistant Ceasar Rodriguez was beaten by a gang of youths Jan. 27, 1989, when he rescued a 17-year-old boy on a street near his school. Rodriguez was hospitalized for two days with stab wounds to his right wrist and chest. Seventeen people from 11 states were named winners of portions of a $42,500 grant from the Carnegie Hero Fund Commission today in Pittsburgh.
19900725000000000	ATTEMPT TO HELP WAS FINAL ACT BY GOOD SAMARITAN; CRIME: GARY SMITH WON THE HEARTS OF THE COMMUNITY FOR RUSHING TO THE AID OF A WOMAN WHO HAD CONFRONTED A BURGLAR.. Scripps Memorial Hospital for the first time flew the flag at half-staff Tuesday for one of its own patients, to honor a 35-year-old man who died of gunshot wounds after attempting to stop a burglar in University City. Gary Smith, a North Park carpet layer, died Tuesday morning. He had been shot four times with a small-caliber handgun last Wednesday after he responded to a woman's screams for help after she confronted a burglar in her home. "We are all devastated," said a prepared statement by the Smith family. "His death is not fair because he was so good, and he was only trying to help. We do want to thank the people of San Diego for all the cards, letters and contributions sent to us. We really appreciate everyone's concern." For the past week, cards and flowers poured into Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, some from friends and neighbors, but most from people who had never met Smith but who wanted to salute his heroics. During his six-day hospitalization, Smith was in critical condition in the surgical intensive care unit and underwent five operations. Nurses described him as a "fighter." Smith, who friends and neighbors said was a happy family man, is survived by his wife, Sandra, and their three children: Dominique, 7; Kenny, 3, and Danielle, 9 months. Funeral services will be held in Columbus, Ohio, where Smith's mother lives, probably at the end of the week, hospital spokesman Michael Dabney said. Memorial services have not been planned in San Diego, he said. Police officers, hospital workers and others close to the family said they were overwhelmed by the outpouring of support and concern from the community. The family has received more than a thousand letters and cards since Thursday, hospital spokeswoman Edie High said. A spokeswoman for the San Diego Blood Bank, where 501 people donated a pint of blood each in Smith's name, said the turnout for Smith was comparable to the community response after last fall's San Francisco earthquake. "We talk about citizens getting involved. Gary did. That was the type of individual that he was," said police Sgt. Willie P. Smith, who was one of the officers on the scene after the shooting. "It's unfortunate that he tried to come to someone's aid and wound up dying for it." Flags at all Scripps institutions flew at half-staff Tuesday and were to be at half-staff again today, Dabney said. "That's unprecedented, but we felt it was appropriate. He risked his life and ultimately gave his life for what he did," Dabney said. Smith, of the 4000 block of Alabama Street, was laying carpet at a condominium in the 7900 block of Camino Tranquilo when he heard screams from the building next door. Smith, who worked for a carpet installation firm, chased a gun-wielding man about a block down the residential street before he was shot in the face, stomach, left arm and right thigh, police said. Doctors were able to remove two bullets from Smith's body, but Dabney said the bullet in his head and abdomen were not removed because doctors considered it too risky. Timothy Howard Pemberton, 22, was arrested Friday in connection with the shooting and was booked on suspicion of attempted murder and related charges. At Pemberton's arraignment Tuesday, the charge was changed to murder. Pemberton pleaded not guilty on all counts. The district attorney's office said it is considering filing for a finding of special circumstances, which would make Pemberton eligible for the death penalty if convicted. Bail was set at $1 million. Police Officer Bob Chorny said he was the second officer to arrive at the scene of the shooting. "There was lots of blood," he said. "Gary was sitting on the steps with multiple gunshot wounds and was in shock. He kept on asking for medics and saying he would pass out. I told him to stay with me. "This is one of those things that I'll never forget," Chorny said. Laurence Bekins, 24, a UC San Diego student who lives next door to the burglarized family, said he met Smith the day of the shooting as he was walking out the door to go to class. Bekins said Smith was working in the balcony apartment, and Smith struck up a conversation with him. "The last thing I said to him was, 'Take it easy,' " Bekins said. "I missed the action by about a minute and a half." Bekins said that, almost immediately after he left, Christiane Chazin, the woman who found the intruder in her home, emerged from her apartment screaming. Larry Price, a pharmacy worker who lives next door to the Smith family, said Smith, who had lived in the quiet neighborhood for about seven months, appeared to be a family-oriented man. He said he often saw Smith playing with his three children or sitting in a lawn chair in his front yard watching his children bicycle in the street. More than $10,000 in donations to defray hospital expenses, estimated to reach at least $100,000, have been contributed since Thursday to the Gary Smith fund, High said. Several area organizations also pooled blood donations in Smith's name. "When San Diegans hear about a need of a particular person, they find a way to help," San Diego Blood Bank spokeswoman Lynn Stedd said. She said enough blood was donated to replace the blood transfused to Smith. The San Diego Police Officers Assn. also donated 21 pints of blood from its blood bank, usually reserved for injured officers and families of officers, said Sgt. Smith, an association board director. "In light of what Gary had done, it seemed appropriate that since he tried to help police officers, we felt it was appropriate for us to help him as much as we could," the sergeant said. Dabney said Smith's family rode a "roller coaster of emotions" over the past few days. He said the family's most optimistic time was after a five-hour operation Friday, Smith's last, when doctors stopped internal bleeding. He died of lung failure. Dabney said the family was uninsured but that the hospital's financial department will help them receive financial aid. Instead of flowers, the family is asking for contributions to two funds established to help offset medical costs and to assist the Smith family. Contributions may be sent to the Scripps Memorial Hospital Foundation Gary Smith Fund or to Sandra Smith, P.O. Box 28, La Jolla 92038.
19900727000000000	MEMORIAL SERVICE TO GIVE FINAL THANKS TO GOOD SAMARITAN. Gary Smith, the North Park carpet layer whose six-day fight for life drew the admiration of San Diegans after he tried to stop a burglary July 19 in University City, will be eulogized tonight. A memorial service for Smith, whom the press dubbed the "good Samaritan," will be at 6 p.m. today at the Anderson-Ragsdale Mortuary, 5050 Federal Blvd., and will be open to the public. Smith, 35, died Tuesday of four gunshot wounds he received at close range when he confronted the burglar. His heroics have been saluted throughout San Diego for the past week. "He always tried to help people. He was a hero. I can say I wish he hadn't done it, but you can't say that," said Sandra Budik, Smith's girlfriend and the mother of two of his three children. "It's heartwarming to know how much everyone cared. It helped a lot in such a horrible time," Budik, 27, said. Smith died on her birthday. During the past week, more than $27,000 in donations to defray medical expenses and assist Smith's family have poured into the Gary Smith Memorial Fund, established at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, where he underwent five operations. More than 1,000 letters and cards also have been sent to Smith's family. "It's times like this that you really find out how people care," Budik said. "I wish to thank the people of San Diego for all the support, contributions, prayers and thoughts. It's been a comfort to the family." Smith has three children: Dominique, 7, a son from a former marriage; Kenny, 3, and Danielle, 9 months. Custody of Dominique will be given to his natural mother, Budik said. On Wednesday, the San Diego Police Officers Assn. announced it had established a $1,000 scholarship fund for Smith's children, a practice usually reserved for children of officers killed in the line of duty. The group had already dipped into its blood bank and donated 21 pints of its reserved blood to Smith. Although Budik had originally been identified as Smith's wife, she clarified the couple's relationship Thursday, saying they were not married but had lived together for two years. "Gary and I were not legally married, but we considered ourselves married," Budik said. "We weren't trying to deceive anyone in any way at all. We were planning on getting married. We just didn't get a chance." Budik, a claims adjuster with Mercury Insurance for three years, said she doesn't think her salary will be enough to support herself and her two children. Of the money donated to the Smith fund, hospital spokesman Mike Dabney said about $8,000 will be given to the Smith family for family expenses, and nearly $19,000 has been set aside to pay medical bills. Dabney said Smith's hospital bill is estimated at $100,000. Budik said MediCal, the Victim-Witness Assistance Program and other sources will be tapped. Smith had been installing carpet in the 7900 block of Camino Tranquilo when he heard screams from the building next door and chased a gun-wielding man before being shot in the face, stomach, left arm and right thigh, police said. Timothy Howard Pemberton, 22, was arrested last week in connection with the shooting and has been charged with murder, burglary, robbery, auto theft and possession of methamphetamine. Pemberton pleaded not guilty on all counts. The district attorney's office said it is considering filing for a finding of special circumstances, which would make Pemberton eligible for the death penalty if convicted. Pemberton "will pay for what he did. I'm glad they caught him," Budik said. "I'd rather see him in prison for the rest of his life so he can suffer a little bit." The Rev. George Walker Smith, minister of the Christ United Presbyterian Church, will lead funeral services for Smith at Anderson-Ragsdale. The mortuary donated funeral services. Budik said the body will be shipped Saturday to Smith's hometown, Columbus, Ohio, for funeral services and burial.
19901023000000000	STATE SALUTES BRAVERY OF 4 FROM COUNTY. Four Ventura County residents who braved fire, water and violence to save others were honored as heroes Monday by Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp at a ceremony in Westlake Village. In February, a man suspected of threatening his estranged wife was tackled by Richard Gonzalez, 37, a meat cutter from Fillmore, who held him until Ventura County sheriff's deputies arrived. Gonzalez was one of 20 Southern Californians who received certificates from the attorney general for brave acts. Some citizens rescued residents of burning homes and pulled potential drowning victims out of the ocean, all without thought for their own safety. "You have to get involved," Gonzalez said. "What happens if you don't? You just have to do it." For Gonzalez, who spent eight years in the Marine Corps, it was the second time in eight years he had saved another person's life. In 1982, while in San Clemente, he prevented a child from choking. The three other Ventura County citizens who were honored also reacted bravely after stumbling on unexpected danger: In June, Denise Boczek was walking along the beach in Point Mugu when she heard cries for help from a drowning 7-year-old boy and his baby-sitter. She jumped into the water and rescued both. In February, Chad Carper of Meiners Oaks saved a woman whose mobile home was ablaze by leading her outside and then extinguishing the fire with a garden hose. Gerald Saavedra of Thousand Oaks was just cashing a check at a bank in December, 1989, when his wife, a bank worker, told him there had been a robbery. He caught the suspected robber and held him until sheriff's deputies arrived. Others honored were two Whittier residents who on Jan. 1 formed a rescue team with three neighbors to help a family out of a burning home and three Manhattan Beach men who saved a woman from rape by a knife-wielding assailant. All were citizens who "came to the aid of the victims without hesitating, despite the potential danger to themselves," Van de Kamp said. In addition, 35 members of law enforcement from Los Angeles, Orange, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara and Ventura counties were honored for their valor and police work. They included peace officers, prosecutors and probation officials. But it was the citizens who received special praise from Van de Kamp. He said neighbors and bystanders have helped police capture suspects and save victims -- thus helping the legal community to do its job. "Our job is ineffective unless we get the help of the local community," he said.
19901024000000000	ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: FULLERTON; OFFICER, 2 OTHERS HONORED FOR RESCUE. A Fullerton police officer has received an Award of Valor from the California State Firemen's Assn. for his heroic efforts in saving three people from a burning car last New Year's Eve. Officer Steve Bair, 30, who has been on the force for seven years, received the award early this month. Also receiving awards for their assistance in the rescue were John Lamkin of Fullerton and K.C. Schwarz, a former Fullerton resident who now lives in Colorado. The three were nominated for an award by Capt. Tom Metcalfe of the Fullerton Fire Department, who was part of the company that responded to the rescue. "I think what they did was tremendous," Metcalfe said. "If it hadn't been for Steve and the two other citizens, there is no doubt in my mind that the three people in that car would have died." At 4 p.m. on New Year's Eve, Bair was taking a report on an earlier traffic accident that had occurred at the intersection of Harbor Boulevard and La Entrada Place. He heard skidding tires and looked up to see a station wagon slam into a tree, trapping the driver and two passengers inside. Immediately after impact, the car's engine caught fire. Running to the car, Bair was able to pull one of the occupants, who was unconscious, out of the back seat. A few moments later, Schwarz and Lamkin stopped to help Bair, and the three tried to free the driver and the other passenger. After they were unable to pull the remaining two from the wreckage, Bair ran back to his police car and grabbed a fire extinguisher, and was able to fend off the flames until firefighters arrived. All three victims have since recovered. Blair, who lives in Ontario, also received the Award of Heroism last May from the American Legion for his part in the rescue.ERIK HAMILTON
19901028000000000	CHILDREN SAVED FROM HOME BLAZE BY 7 HEROES; FIRE: YOUNG PARTY-GOERS AT A HOUSE NEXT DOOR RISK THEIR OWN LIVES TO RESCUE A FAMILY OF SIX TRAPPED INSIDE.. Seven young men were hailed as heroes Saturday after they dashed into a burning house in Hacienda Heights and rescued a family of six from the flames, including a girl with cerebral palsy who was confined to a wheelchair. Firefighters arrived at the scene to find the men battling the blaze with garden hoses, the mother and children they had rescued wandering dazed in their back yard, and the girl crying in her wheelchair. The rescuers suffered from smoke inhalation and cuts, and they were taken to nearby hospitals for treatment and then released. "I have no doubt that the family would have died if they had been in there five or 10 more minutes," said Los Angeles County Battalion Chief Bill Miles. The fire, which began shortly before 1 a.m. in the 16000 block of Sigman Avenue, was caused by an electrical short in the bedroom of one of the residents, who had tacked extension cords and wires for several aquariums and clocks to the wall, Miles said. About 50 young people celebrating a girl's 18th birthday next door were dancing when Catherine Guillen, the mother of three children caught in the blaze, ran up screaming: "My kids! My kids!" Smoke was billowing out of her house. Mark Torrez, 19, jumped the 4-foot wall between his house and the one on fire, wet himself down with a garden hose, covered his face with his shirt and ran into the house with the hose. "All I could think of were the kids," he said. At the same time, another party-goer, Andrew Gonzales, entered the burning house searching for the children. "You could just hear people choking," said the 19-year-old supermarket clerk. Victor Martinez, a 25-year-old mover, broke a window, climbed in and grabbed one girl who, he said, was "running around from one side of the room to the other, screaming." Charles Madden, 21, and Richard Scaggs, 20, ran to the back of the house, where they could hear the girl in the wheelchair sobbing: "Mama! Help!" Scaggs threw a potted plant through the window and climbed inside. Finally, he groped in the smoke until he found the girl and handed her out the window to Madden. By the time firefighters arrived, the blaze was nearly out. "We got them all out," Scaggs told Chief Miles, and then collapsed, overcome by smoke. Firefighters identified two other rescuers as Leo Guillen, 17, a brother of the victims, and Lewis Cebellos, 18, who had also been at the party. The family is being sheltered by the Red Cross. On Saturday afternoon, family members returned to the charred house to pick through their possessions. All that was left, Miles said, was a melted second wheelchair the family had just purchased for the 12-year-old. The fire caused $75,000 in damage, officials said. Neighbors said the Guillen family had lived in the area for about a year. The family's father is in Mexico City on business, authorities said. Late Saturday, most of the young men were home sleeping. That was when the fear caught up to them, they said. "Check it out! I'm a hero!" Gonzalez told his mother. But his knees were shaking, he said.
19901209000000000	TODDLER'S RESCUER DOESN'T SEE SELF AS HERO. Larry Ogletree doesn't think of himself as a hero. The Evans, Ga., man said he was just doing what he hopes anyone would do when he chased a runaway car, dodged traffic and stopped an oncoming 18-wheeler to rescue a 2-year-old boy inside the car. "If one of my sons were in a life-threatening situation, whether it be that or anything, I would want somebody to do the same thing," said Ogletree, general manager for the American National Insurance Cos. office in Augusta and the father of three boys, ages 12, 7 and 4. Ogletree, 40, had just turned onto a busy five-lane highway in suburban Martinez on his way to work Aug. 8, 1989, when he spotted the silver compact car rolling out of a convenience store parking lot. "It just didn't look normal," he said. "There was something wrong. The wheels weren't turning or anything. Then I saw the child's head in the back of the car." He also saw a woman, later identified as the child's mother, standing in the parking lot screaming. "At that point, I knew what was happening," Ogletree said. He jumped the median in his own car and parked, then began chasing the runaway car, which was traveling diagonally across traffic headed into the path of the oncoming tractor-trailer rig. "I looked up at the 18-wheeler," Ogletree said. "His and my eyes met. He just understood and he, of course, applied his brakes. He was about 10 feet from the car. I was running the whole time." Ogletree finally got close enough to grab the driver's side of the car, which was open. "I threw myself into it. I had ahold of the steering wheel and applied the brakes. The child was calm until I hit the brakes. Then he started crying. He was in a safety seat." Ogletree, who escaped with only scarred shins, said he believes the boy's sister accidentally hit the gearshift when she got out of the car, allowing the car to roll. The mother thanked him but implored him not to release her name or the names of her children, a request that he has honored. Ogletree said he didn't fully grasp what might have happened until that night, when he went to pick up his two younger boys at a day-care center adjacent to the convenience store. "I guess that at that point it kind of came over me I might not have been there to pick them up. It was very emotional," he said. Frank Spears, an insurance agent in a competing firm, has known Ogletree more than 10 years and said he wasn't surprised by his actions. "He's that kind of a fellow," Spears said. "He is not one that sits on the sidelines. He is a doer, a mover, a shaker. If you go into a fight, you want him to be behind you." "I don't think any of us were prepared for the fact that someone would have the courage to do what he did," said Carol Shearer, a volunteer at the Columbia County Humane Society.
19901228000000000	2 OJAI MEN RECEIVE AWARDS FOR HEROISM; GOOD SAMARITANS: TIM DONOGHUE AND BOB LEMON ARE HONORED FOR RISKING THEIR LIVES TO RESCUE THREE VICTIMS OF A FIERY CRASH.. More than 10 months after their dramatic rescue of three people after a fiery crash on California 33, two men have been honored by the Carnegie Hero Fund Commission, officials from the Pittsburgh, Pa.-based commission announced Thursday. Tim Donoghue and Bob Lemon, both of Ojai, were among 16 people nationwide to receive the Carnegie Medal for heroism and awards of $2,500 each. The awards honor people who have risked -- or lost -- their lives to save others. Lemon, a fire safety engineer, was not available for comment Thursday. But Donoghue says it still helps him to talk about the frightening sight that the two men came upon at 3 a.m. on Feb. 5 on deserted California 33 and the events that followed. They were driving to Los Angeles International Airport, where Lemon was scheduled to take an early-morning flight, when they saw what appeared to be a small brush fire on the roadside ahead, Donoghue said. As they drew closer, Donoghue and Lemon saw that the flames were coming from a car and that a man with a bloody face was standing beside it, waving them down. "It was kind of a grotesque, Stephen King-movie kind of thing," said Donoghue, 44. When they pulled over, the two men discovered that a 19-year-old woman was trapped inside the burning car, her leg pinned between the passenger seat and the door. Donoghue said he rushed to a telephone a few blocks away to call for assistance while Lemon helped the injured driver. When Donoghue returned, he reached into the burning car to try to pull the woman out. "I remember I was kind of concerned wondering whether the whole car would go up" in flames, Donoghue said. "It was kind of engulfed. But I saw she was a normal-sized girl and I'm kind of a big-sized person, so I said, 'I should be able to do this.' " His first attempt was unsuccessful, said the 180-pound Donoghue. "It was real hot, and the dashboard was dripping on her jeans and sweater," Donoghue said. On his second attempt, he was able to free the woman with Lemon's help. Seconds later, they discovered a third victim, a man who had been thrown through the windshield and was lying a few yards in front of the car. The man regained consciousness, became delirious and ran up the road. Both rescuers had to restrain him until paramedics arrived. The three victims -- Denise Reid, now 20; Dennis Honey, 20, and John Brown, 18 -- had been returning from Disneyland when Honey fell asleep at the wheel. Now fully recovered, the three have kept in contact with their rescuers. Reid and Honey, of Ojai, are expecting a baby any day, both said. Brown is a college student in Orange County. "I think they really deserve it," Reid said. "They definitely saved my life." The men have also been honored by the Ventura County Board of Supervisors, the county's Peace Officers Assn. and a state firefighters organization. Donoghue, who works for a Ventura car dealership, said he has received training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and that Lemon is a trained CPR instructor. He called the two-minute rescue "one of the most extraordinary experiences in my life." "I feel there is a God, and he wanted us to be there and do what we did," Donoghue said. "I don't remember being afraid." Honey said he will always be grateful to Donoghue and Lemon. "The way I look at it," he said, "there's nothing that could repay what they gave us."
