10000000000000000	Basque separatism Describe developments in the Basque separatist movement 1996 2000.
19960625000000000	Basque Group Starts Week-Long Cease-Fire in Spain. Madrid, June 24 (Xinhua) -- Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar said that the week-long unilateral cease-fire started today by the militant Basque separatist group Eta is a propaganda stunt. The cease-fire, said the prime minister, was designed to disrupt a upcoming meeting of Basque parties opposed to Eta, which over the past 27 years has killed more than 750 people. Meanwhile, Interior Minister Javier Mayor Oreja called on the Eta, which has fought for a separate Basque state made up of four northern Spanish provinces and three southwestern French departments, to release prison officer Jose Ortega Lara it has held for five months. He urged the parties attending the Tuesday meeting to concentrate on uniting against the Eta and not squabble over the response to the cease-fire. Carlos Iturgay, the Popular Party spokesman in the Basque country, said talks with the Eta should not be considered. The opposition Spanish Socialist Workers Party said the week-long cease-fire was insufficient and that the Eta would have to offer more before negotiations could be considered. The Basque regional government, which is led by the moderate Basque Nationalist Party, said the cease-fire provided a reason for hope but called on the Eta to give up its arms altogether. The Eta has said it will hold Ortega Lara until the government changes its policy of placing Eta prisoners in jails outside the Basque Country. Some 30 of the 600 Eta members in Spanish prisons are due to be moved to the Basque country in coming weeks.
19960703000000000	Spanish Political Parties Mobilized to Combat Terrorism. MADRID, July 2 (Xinhua) -- A group of Spanish political parties will meet here next week to mobilize against the Basque separatist group ETA, Interior Minister Jaime Mayor Oreja said today. The July 10 meeting is aimed at "uniting all democratic forces in the struggle against terrorism," Mayor Oreja said. Participating in the meeting will be those who adopted in 1987 a common stance in fighting the terrorist war launched by the ETA, and have since formed a political alliance. The national alliance has been allying with its regional counterpart in Basque, in northern Spain, to quell the ETA, namely the Basque Homeland and Freedom. The meeting, which came on after the ETA's week-long unilateral truce ended Monday, was expected to strengthen the links between the national and regional anti-terrorism alliances. The Herri Batasuna party, the ETA's political wing, will be excluded from the meeting. The ETA has been fighting for a separate Basque state for 27 years. About 750 people were killed in the pro-independence war.
19960714000000000	Bombs Go off in Spain, But Kill None. MADRID, July 13 (Xinhua) -- Three bombs, claimed by the Basque separatist ETA, went off in the southern Spanish city of Malaga early today but nobody was injured. The explosions, seemed to be designed to cause no casualties and little damage, were the latest of a series of small blasts reported this week in the area. Local police evacuated an area near the city park after receiving a warning call from someone claiming to be an ETA member. ETA, or Basque Homeland and Freedom, has been fighting since 1968 for an independent Basque state, leaving 800 people dead.
19980623101700000	ETA claims responsibility for two murders.
19980625054800000	Report: town councilor killed by Basque separatists.
19980627153200000	Radical Basque nationalists march demanding a negotiated end to violence.
19980702084000000	Socialists leave Basque coalition gov't over links with radicals. VITORIA, Spain (AP) _ Spain's Socialist party has pulled out of the three-party Basque regional government because of links between the coalition's principal member and an outside group allied to the armed separatist organization ETA. 
19980822145100000	Basque separatist youths attack police in Bilbao, 17 injured. BILBAO, Spain (AP) _ A gang of hooded youths who support Basque separatism pelted police with Molotov cocktails and other projectiles at a street fair in Bilbao, leaving 17 people injured, authorities said Saturday. 
19980902082000000	ETA says Spain, France trying to eliminate Basque language. BILBAO, Spain (AP) _ The armed Basque separatist movement ETA accused the Spanish government Wednesday of trying to snuff out the Basque language. 
19980916151700000	Basque homeland debate enlivened by regional elections. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ It's election time in Spain's troubled Basque region, bringing with it a flurry of attempts to end three decades of violence in which nearly 800 people have been killed by ETA rebels fighting for an independent Basque homeland. 
19980916172400000	URGENT. Armed Basque separatist group ETA announces cease-fire 
19981005092400000	Adams calls for international help to resolve of Basque conflict. BILBAO, Spain (AP) _ The recent cease-fire by Basque gunmen provides a prime opportunity to resolve Spain's Basque conflict and the international community, particularly the United States, has a duty to help bring this about, Irish republican leader Gerry Adams said Monday. 
19981110125600000	Spain's government rules out discussing Basque independence with. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ The Spanish government has ruled out any discussion of Basque independence in expected peace talks with the armed separatist group ETA, a government spokesman said Tuesday. 
19981110161400000	Spain rules out discussing Basque independence in peace talks. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ The Spanish government has ruled out any discussion of Basque independence in possible peace talks with the armed separatist group ETA, an official said Tuesday. 
19981111074900000	Spain considering paying damages for anti-Basque death squad. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar is considering paying damages to relatives of people killed by government-backed death squads that targeted Basque separatists in the 1980s when his Socialist predecessors were in power, a spokesman said Wednesday. 
19981112114500000	Report: First direct contact this government-ETA. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ The Spanish government of Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar and the Basque militant group ETA have made direct contact for the first time, taking a step toward new peace talks, a newspaper reported Thursday. 
19981119102000000	Former ETA leader asks government for first step with prisoners. VITORIA, Spain (AP) _ A former leader of the Basque separatist group ETA urged the government Thursday to transfer ETA prisoners to jails inside the Basque country as a first step towards peace talks. 
19981123135700000	Former Italian president Cossiga visits Spain's Basque region. BILBAO, Spain (AP) _ Former Italian President Francesco Cossiga arrived here Monday for a four-day visit which he said was aimed at getting a firsthand view of the peace process in Spain's Basque region, news reports said. 
19981218054100000	Spain to move some Basque prisoners closer to home. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ Spain said Friday it will move 21 Basque separatist inmates from far-flung prisons to jails closer to their home region, a move seen as a gesture to the armed Basque group ETA. 
19981221182000000	Basque group reiterates its willing to negotiate with Spain. MADRID, Spain (AP) _ The armed Basque separatist group ETA reiterated its willingness Monday to open peace negotiations with the government, but fell short of announcing a permanent cease-fire as has been demanded by Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar. 
19990524034100000	. &LR;   &LR;  BILBAO, Spain _ As NATO rushes troops and equipment to the Balkans, a powerful ethnic separatist movement is building toward a showdown on the Alliance's own Atlantic flank. Confronted with unprecedented political opposition and public anger, Spanish rule in Basque country is close to foundering _ adding a Western European chapter to the breakups that have shattered Yugoslavia and other Eastern European countries since 1990. For the first time, a unified Basque-nationalist regional government was elected in October, following the declaration of a cease-fire by ETA, the underground separatist army that has waged a bloody 30-year war against Madrid. The cease-fire was answered by Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar with a hard-line crackdown, deeply alienating most voters and ending decades of cooperation between Basque moderates and Spanish political parties. ``I don't make gestures. I apply the law,'' Aznar says about his refusal to meet the cease-fire with conciliatory measures, much less peace negotiations. ``There's essentially no contact anymore between our people and the central government,'' says Gorka Agirre, a leader of the mainstream Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) in Bilbao, the region's largest city. ``Our fathers and grandfathers could only &LR;   &LR; dream of a free Basque land. My generation believes that we will actually create one,'' says Dabid Lizarralde, 21, a university student in the coastal town of Algorta, 10 miles north of Bilbao, as long-distance runners swept by in a province-wide race organized to support Basque language studies. The runners, backed by $35 donations for each kilometer, were diverted around the town center to avoid colliding with a parade sponsored by Herri Batasuna, the political arm of ETA. They passed directly in front of an 8 p.m. demonstration by parents of Basque political prisoners that has occupied Algorta's main intersection every evening for four years. Portraits of the town's 13 sons and daughters in Spanish prisons were posted in taverns, restaurants and shops. Greeted by musicians playing Basque folk songs on traditional instruments, crowds of people poured out of the local railroad station from yet other demonstrations in Bilbao, including a silent protest march that blocks the city's principal thoroughfare each Friday. Basque country in 1999 recalls Prague or Budapest a decade ago, when endless demonstrations and a sense of history-in-the-making brought ordinary life to a giddy standstill. There are echoes, too, of the violent Kurdish separatist war that has killed thousands in Turkey, and of stubborn ethnic nationalist movements that have troubled other NATO governments during the past few years in Scotland and Wales, Corsica, northern Italy, Flemish Belgium and Quebec. Basque nationalists follow all of these movements closely, and maintain quasi-diplomatic relations with several, in what amounts to a de facto alliance of ``stateless nations'' inside NATO that stretches from the British Isles to the Aegean Sea. The new regional government has invited the outlawed Kurdish parliament to convene in Bilbao in July, and it protested the sales of arms manufactured by Spanish firms in Basque country to the Turkish government. Madrid has officially prohibited the convention, setting the stage for a confrontation over Basque ties to the Kurds. But the closest kinship is with Ireland, where the very institutions and tactics of separatist rebellion are cut from the same cloth _ and where the connection has a six-decade history, speaks in the lilting brogue of Dublin and has a Basque family name: Gallastegi. Now an energetic 73, Iker Gallastegi arrived in Ireland in September 1937 at age 10 with his parents and five siblings. It was the height of the Spanish Civil War, and Basque country was in flames. Eli Gallastegi, Iker's father, was a leading Basque nationalist, singled out for liquidation by General Francisco Franco's Fascists when the family fled Spain. Dublin was already his second home. Inspired by the stubborn Irish fight for independence, the elder Gallastegi had written a history of the 1916 Easter Rising against British rule, and in 1932 founded a trading firm in Bilbao to import eggs, potatoes and pork from the young Irish Free State. In their Dublin exile, the Gallastegi children were raised on an uncompromising mixture of Basque separatism and Irish republicanism. Eventually, that education led Iker himself to return to Basque country as a young nationalist organizer in 1952 under an assumed name, and to flee once again just ahead of Franco's police. ``I had to beat the dust in 1952,'' he says. ``It was 17 years before I was able to return home, after Franco was dead.'' The rebellious family tradition has carried into the next generation. Gallastegi's daughter Usune, 35, has been in a Spanish prison since 1994, sentenced to an eight-year term for ``collaborating with terrorists.'' The exchanges between Ireland and Basque country that began with the Gallastegis continue at a brisk clip today. ``We're not married, but you could surely say that we are living together,'' says Gallastegi. The result is a set of matched political structures that frame, in tandem, Western Europe's two oldest ethnic nationalist movements. The relationships between the underground ETA and Herri Batasuna _ and major elements in their strategy, training and recruitment methods _ are mirror images of the relationship between Sinn Fein, the militant but legal Irish political party, and its own armed wing, the Irish Republican Army. Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams has made at least half a dozen visits to Bilbao, according to Herri Batasuna officials, and other high-ranking members of the two parties consult regularly on tactics. During several assignments in and around Belfast in recent years, a Chronicle reporter encountered visiting groups of militants from Jarrai, the Herri Batasuna youth organization, boisterously participating in Republican political demonstrations. So boisterously, in fact, that republican leaders were obliged to restrain the young Basques, who in one instance tried to lead a headlong charge against police lines. Spanish police charge that these visits include military field training under IRA supervision, and they allege that Jarrai is behind a spate of firebombings directed at officials of Aznar's conservative People's Party in Basque country. ``Obviously, the ties extend to a working relationship between ETA and IRA on some level. There's a tremendous amount of traffic back and forth between Bilbao and Belfast,'' acknowledges a Basque leader, speaking off the record. ``But that's not something to be discussed publicly.'' As in Northern Ireland, where the Royal Ulster Constabulary is effectively a Protestant police force, Basques face a law enforcement agency _ Spain's Guardia Civil _ that employs virtually no members of its own community. In yet another echo of Irish Republican tactics, Herri Batasuna has compiled lengthy lists of unmarked police car license plate numbers and has posted them in popular taverns run by the party in nearly every Basque town and village. Like its significant other in Ireland, Herri Batasuna ran candidates in regional elections for three decades, only to decline the seats it won in protest against ``foreign rule.'' Then, last year, the IRA declared a permanent cease-fire, and Sinn Fein sat down at the negotiating table with its adversaries. Within weeks, ETA and Herri Batasuna followed suit. The result was a dramatic September meeting in the city of Lizarra, 70 miles south of Bilbao, at which all nine nationalist political parties and 14 Basque labor and cultural organizations issued a joint declaration calling for multiparty negotiations toward self-rule. ``Before Lizarra, the football field had always been the Spanish state,'' says Eusebio Lasa, a member of Herri Batasuna's national council. ``What we decided at Lizarra is that the field must be Basque country itself _ that the future should be up to the Basque people and not simply concessions from officials in Madrid.'' Modeled consciously on the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland, the Lizarra Declaration set the stage for the election, one month later, that ushered in the unprecedented nationalist-run regional government. Between them, the moderate PNV, Herri Batasuna and a third nationalist party now hold 41 seats in the regional parliament, against 30 for the People's Party (PP) and the Socialists. ``The situation has changed enormously,'' says Gorka Agirre of the PNV, which leads the new governing coalition, the first in history not to include either the Socialist Party or the PP. ``We agree now (with Herri Batasuna) that there was no great difference between those two parties when it came to Basques. Neither was interested in talking about a different future here, about any real self-determination,'' he says. PNV leaders point out that few, if any, regional autonomy measures promised as long ago as the 1970s were implemented when the Socialists or conservatives were part of the regional governing coalition. According to the Spanish constitution, even a referendum on self-determination in Basque country remains strictly against the law. This is where the Irish experience no longer fits the Basque reality. The Good Friday Agreement was reached under the auspices of a British government desperate to extricate itself from the Northern Ireland quagmire, and more than happy to have the end game played in Belfast rather than London. The problems since in implementing self-rule in Northern Ireland have not come from 10 Downing Street, but from die-hard factions within the unionist and republican camps. By contrast, there is no war in Basque country between communities, no exchange of atrocities between Bilbao versions of the Catholic and Protestant gunmen who haunt Belfast. ``The enemy isn't the Spanish lad next door,'' says Gallastegi. ``It's the national state,'' in the form of a central government that responded to the historic cease-fire by arresting the very people with whom it must negotiate. ``When I arrived in power, I said, `I will never talk with ETA.' If there is no peace, ETA and ETA alone will be responsible,'' says Aznar, pointing out that ETA has been responsible for more than 800 killings in the past three decades, mostly of government officials. ``Where there is peace, there is discussion. Without discussion, there is no place for peace,'' counters the Rev. Pierre Moleres, bishop of the predominantly Basque city of Bayonne in France. Moleres' offer to help arrange negotiations was rejected by the Aznar government, which opposes any international mediation in the crisis. The crackdown began just as Basque nationalists were laying the groundwork for the cease-fire in October 1997, when the entire 23-member leadership council of Herri Batasuna was sentenced to lengthy jail terms for distributing a video that presented ETA's terms for peace. According to many observers, the imprisoned council members were the most negotiation-minded of the organization's factions to hold sway in years. They join more than 500 Basque political activists now in prison. Since then, ETA militants have been found dead, under suspicious circumstances that recall the work of secret assassination squads in the 1980s that were linked to the Socialist government of Felipe Gonzalez. In late April, under pressure from Madrid, French police rounded up six more nationalist leaders in Paris. Gallastegi's niece Irantzu, a key figure in the ETA bid for peace, was one of those arrested. ``Every effort we've made to search an accord with Aznar, to promote dialogue, has been negative,'' says PNV's Agirre. ``Me, I want peace,'' Aznar insists. ``But they are trying to obtain independence. That's the difference between us.''
20000812153200000	Crowd Rallies for Basque Fighters. BILBAO, Spain (AP) -- Pumping their fists in the air to shouts of ''Long live ETA!'' several thousand people paid tribute Saturday to four young Basque separatists who blew themselves up by accident, reportedly while preparing an attack. A police helicopter hovered in overcast skies as Arnaldo Otegi, leader of the pro-ETA Basque coalition Euskal Herritarrok, pointed to poster-size photographs of the four -- two of them just 22 years old -- and praised them as freedom fighters. Police had feared incidents between the crowd and opponents of ETA, the armed Basque separatist group, but the rally went off peacefully. Speaking before crowd waving red, white and green Basque flags, Otegi said it was a pity that men so young had to die in the Basque conflict. He blamed the Spanish government, saying it had to yield to what he called Basques' desire for self-rule. ''We did not choose violence, but there is no other path,'' Otegi said at the rally in the heart of Bilbao, the largest and richest Basque city. ETA's armed drive for an independent homeland carved out of parts of northern Spain and southern France has claimed nearly 800 lives since it began in 1968. In the Basque language, ETA stands for Basque Freedom and Homeland. Police believe the four ETA members who died had intended to launch an attack on Bilbao. On Wednesday, prosecutors filed a suit against Otegi, accusing him of advocating terrorism after he described the four who died as ''colleagues and patriots.'' Earlier Saturday, suspected supporters of the armed group threw a firebomb at a Civil Guard member's home in the latest in a series of small-scale attacks in the northern Basque region. Nobody was hurt in the incident in Vitoria, the region's capital. The house, belonging to a Civil Guard member who was not identified, was damaged by fire as the guardsman's 17-year-old son was inside the building. During the past three days, assailants have thrown Molotov cocktails at bank offices, burnt some 13 buses and dozens of cars and attacked automatic teller machines in different Basque cities. They have been protesting the deaths of the four suspected ETA members. On Friday, ETA claimed responsibility for 12 attacks between early May and late July. But the armed group did not mention a shooting of an army officer Wednesday or two car bombings that killed a Basque business leader and injured 11 people Tuesday. Police and politicians have blamed ETA.
20000829184400000	Politician Gunned Down in Spain. SAN SEBASTIAN, Spain (AP) -- A politician was gunned down Tuesday in the street of a northern town in the latest in a series of slayings blamed on the armed Basque separatist group ETA. Manuel Indiano, 29, was shot 10 times in the chest and abdomen outside his candy store in Zumarraga, a Basque town, about 250 miles north of Madrid, police said. Indiano, who authorities said refused police protection normally offered politicians in the Basque region, died in the town's hospital an hour after the attack. His wife, pregnant with their first child, was admitted to a hospital later in shock. Although not a member of the governing Popular Party, Indiano became a councilor in Zumarraga for the party six months ago. The conservative party fiercely opposes Basque separatism and other moves to change Spain's political makeup. No one took responsibility for the shooting, but Interior Ministry officials immediately blamed ETA, which began its campaign for independence of the three-province northern region in 1968. The killing brought to 12 the number of slayings -- five this month -- attributed to ETA since it ended a 14-month truce last December. The group, whose name stands for Basque Homeland and Freedom, has been blamed for killing nearly 800 people. It normally claims responsibility for its attacks several weeks after carrying them out. Officials believe the latest ETA campaign seeks to push the government to the negotiating table. A single round of talks during last year's truce ended in stalemate. The killing was condemned by political parties, labor unions and Amnesty International. ''We are faced once again with the confirmation that the terrorist group ETA has no other aim but to impose its will on others and exterminate all those who don't think like they do,'' said deputy Prime Minister Marian Rajoy. Indiano's body was to be brought to Madrid, where his parents live, for burial Wednesday, news reports said. Hundreds of people gathered Tuesday evening in Bilbao, San Sebastian and Vitoria, the capitals of the three Basque provinces, to observe a few minutes of silence. The quiet was broken by periodic shouts against ETA. In Zumarraga itself, at a special town meeting called to condemn the killing, one of three councilors who belong to the pro-ETA party Euskal Herritarrok tried to read a communique but was drowned out by shouts of ''murderers.'' While security force members have long been ETA's main target, in recent years the organization has begun killing more politicians, particularly those of Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar's Popular Party. Aznar, who was on a visit to Poland on Tuesday, survived a car-bomb attempt on his life in 1995 when he was in the opposition.
20000910095400000	Spain Bomb Blast Damages Disco. DEBA, Spain (AP) -- A bomb damaged a discotheque in Spain's northern Basque region Sunday in an attack claimed by Basque separatists. Nobody was hurt in the explosion shortly before 11 a.m., but police said the bomb caused extensive damage to the Txitxarro discotheque in the town of Deba, some 15 miles west of coastal city of San Sebastian. Basque police said a man identifying himself as a member of the Basque armed group ETA warned of an imminent explosion at the disco. The anonymous caller also said that two people who were cleaning inside the discotheque had been left handcuffed to a tree in the road of Itziar toward Hendaya. A short time later, a hunter found a man and a woman tied to a tree and reported it to police. The two confirmed that there were no other people inside the discotheque at the time of the explosion, which mainly damaged the building's roof. The mayor of Deba, Jesus Maria Aguirrezabala, said that the target of the blast was the owner of the disco, Narciso Korta, who is a brother of a businessmen killed in a car bomb in August. ETA has claimed responsibility for that bombing. ETA regularly targets the Basque business community as part of its independence campaign. A series of attacks by ETA in the last two months are seen as an acceleration of the campaign of the armed group. It has been blamed for about a dozen killings this year since it ended a 14-month truce last December. Nearly 800 people have been killed since ETA started its campaign for independence 30 years ago. ETA, a Basque-language acronym for Basque Homeland and Freedom, demands the right to self determination for Spain's three Basque provinces in the north. It envisions an independent state that would also incorporate Basque regions in southwestern France. Historically, the Basques have maintained a separate cultural identity and language. For some, ETA's fight is a legitimate battle for sovereignty. But the majority of Spaniards oppose their goals, pointing out that under Spain's democratic constitution, the Basques enjoy more autonomy than any other region in Europe.
20000916000000000	Chief of Basque Militant Group ETA Arrested in France. PARIS, September 16 (Xinhua) -- The chief of the Basque militant group ETA, Ignacio Gracia Arregui, was arrested Friday evening by French security force in southwest France, a media report said Saturday. Arregui, also known as "Inaki de Renteria", was arrested when he was with his wife in an apartment in the village of Bidart in the French Basque country. The arrest came as ETA was launching an intensive campaign of attacks against the Spanish authorities. ETA has killed 12 people in terrorist attacks since the end of its truce with Madrid last December. Born in 1955 in Renteria, Spanish Basque country, Arregui is the highest leader of ETA and leader of its military wing since 1992, according to the Spanish Interior Ministry. He was believed to be the mastermind of the abortive assassination plot in 1995 against King Juan Carlos in the island of Palma de Majorque.
