10000000000000000	anti smoking laws Describe anti smoking laws passed or rejected world wide prohibit smoking in public places or work places  Include any arguments used for or against such laws.
19960509000000000	Beijing Taking Lead in Banning Smoking. BEIJING, May 9 (Xinhua) -- Beijing legislators have passed a smoking ban, stepping to the forefront of keeping tobacco out of offices. The ban is scheduled to take effect next Wednesday in public places such as hospitals, schools, cinemas, department stores, and public conveyances. More than 30 "no-smoking" signs have been placed inside buildings of the Municipal People's Congress, the local legislative body, since it passed the ban last December. Cigarettes were banned from all offices and meeting rooms of the MPC as soon as it published news of the regulation. Buildings of the municipal government and the Municipal Communist Party Committee have also become smoke-free areas, meaning that smokers are allowed to satisfy their craving only in designated smoking areas. The city has asked all government office workers to set an example in the citywide anti-smoking drive, which is expected to be a long and trying time for millions of smokers. More than 80,000 volunteers will be on duty in no-smoking areas from next week to levy a ten-yuan (a little more than one US dollar) fine on those who break the rules.
19960514000000000	Farewell to Smokes in Beijing's Public Places (1). BEIJING, May 14 (Xinhua) -- Tomorrow will mark the start of hard times for more than two million smokers in the Chinese capital, when public places just say "no" to smoking tomorrow. A local smoking ban will go into effect tomorrow, and "No smoking" signs and admonitory slogans will be seen on major streets, at busy shopping areas, and in public places in Beijing. Some 80,000 people will go to the areas to enforce the ban tomorrow, stopping and fining offenders. The ban was passed by the Municipal People's Congress, the local legislative body, last December, and has gained wide support, although half the adult males are still smoking, and the number of women and teenagers who puff is on the rise. A massive publicity campaign backed by media coverage was begun several years ago to make people aware of the adverse effects of smoking and to encourage them to stop. Of course, chewing gum companies have been eager to take the opportunity to cash in, collecting money that used to be used to support the habit. Different types of gum began appearing and being heavily advertised in recent times, selling themselves as "good companions" to those who want to kick the habit. A recent survey of 9,408 citizens found that about 94 percent endorsed the ban, because they believe that smoking not only harms smokers' health but also that of people nearby. Officials, government employees, medical personnel, and teachers have taken the lead in the fight against smoking, according to the Beijing Patriotic Public Health Campaign Committee, headquarters of the anti-smoking drive, and about 500 schools, hospitals, department stores, and other units have adopted measures to become "smoke-free units", according to the committee.
19960515000000000	Beijing Bans Smoking in Public Places (1). BEIJING, May 15 (Xinhua) -- Sun Guihua failed to find a single smoker to fine in a big Beijing department store, even though she searched among the bustle of shoppers for several hours. Sun was happy about her work anyway, saying: "It shows that almost all people know about the regulation and observe it." The regulation she was referring to, which took effect today, bans smoking in public places. To enforce it and to fine offenders, a small army of more than 80,000 people like Sun was sent to department stores, hospitals, schools, railway stations, and other public places. The air in packed waiting rooms at the Beijing Railway Station used to be filled with smoke, but now look cleaner and smell better. "I have to go outside to take a cigarette because of the 'no smoking' signs everywhere," a traveller waiting for his train said, shrugging. That sign and others have been placed in easy-to-see locations on major streets, in busy shopping areas, and in public places around the city, for several months. There were even people handing out millions of pamphlets on the street to make people aware of the adverse effects of smoking and advising them to avoid it. "I feel relieved because I will no longer be surrounded by clouds of cigarette smoke in offices and meeting rooms," said a passer-by who stopped at one information site on Chang'an Avenue. A government office worker was another beneficiary of the massive anti-smoking drive: "I don't need to clean ash trays full of cigarette butts from now on, because nobody will use them anymore," she remarked while cleaning up a meeting room. "I'm thinking of smoking less and trying to quit," Tian Yong, vice president of the Beijing No. 4 Middle School and a veteran of 26 years of smoking, told Xinhua. He said he thinks stopping teachers from smoking at school is vital to providing a healthy example for students.
19960525000000000	Cigarette Industry Puffed Out As Sales Fall. BEIJING, May 25 (Xinhua) -- China's cigarette industry appears to be losing its puff for the first time ever, with sales and production falling in the first four months of this year, the "China Daily" reported. Nationwide anti-smoking campaigns and rising production costs have taken their toll on the industry, which fuels the habits of over 300 million smokers. The industry, boasting nearly 180 cigarette factories, churned out 56.66 million cigarettes in the first four months of this year, an 1.7 per cent drop from 57.625 million in the same period last year, according to the State Tobacco Monopoly Bureau(STMB). A total of 54.21 million cigarettes were sold, down 2.3 percent from the 55.465 million sold last year. "This is a normal situation, because usually cigarettes see brisk sales prior to the Spring Festival. More often than not, the sales drops markedly afterwards," an STMB official said. "But the influence of the smoking ban in public places in 26 cities throughout the country cannot be ruled out," the official added. "Although we expect an upturn in the sales and production in the second half of this year, the outlook is not rosy," he said. In response to the national anti-smoking movements, STMB has slashed its planned output to 1,712.5 billion cigarettes this year, down from the actual production of 1,736 billion last year. However, as one of the country's largest tax generators, the industry turned in 25.5 billion yuan (three billion US dollars) in profits and taxes, a marked 16 percent rise over the same period of last year. The official attributed the rise in profits to the increased production of famous-brand cigarettes and those with filter-tips, which sell for a higher price. Output of as many as 50 famous-brands has topped 17.34 million over the first four months, accounting for 30 percent of total volume, up 6.7 percent from last year. "Nevertheless, cost hikes in raw materials like tobacco, filter tips, paper, and packaging as well as rise in prices of water and electricity, has trimmed at least three billion yuan off the expected revenue for the period," he said.
19960716000000000	Most Residents In Tianjin Hail Anti-Smoke Move. TIANJIN, July 16 (Xinhua) -- A recent survey shows that the majority of Tianjin residents have hailed the "No-Smoking" regulation that goes into effect in public places this autumn. The survey, conducted by the Tianjin Academy of Social Sciences, revealed that 95.7 percent of the respondents were in favor of the ban. The supporters include 93.1 percent male and 98.5 percent female of those polled. Nearly 92 percent of the people who smoke also expressed their support for the anti-smoke movement. "I have smoked for a long time, and it does great harm to my health. I hope young people will abstain from smoking," said a 59-year-old housewife. According to the survey, nearly 47 percent of the citizens over age 15 are smokers, as against the country's average rate of 33.8 percent. The figures showed that smokers account for 21.7-23.6 percent of local high school students, 16.7-18.6 percent of secondary school students, and even 2.01-9.8 percent of primary school pupils. Each smoker in the city spends an average of 58 yuan on cigarettes, which amounts to 17 percent of their monthly expenditure. The regulation on anti-smoking in public, which has been passed by the standing committee of the local People's Congress, will go into effect on October 15. About 81.5 percent of the people polled believe the new regulation will help smokers kick the habit; 91.2 percent believe that it will help primary and secondary students stop smoking. Many smokers have given up their long-term habit since the current anti-smoking regulations went into effect in Beijing and Shanghai, where many cigarette stalls reported low sales.
19960731000000000	Macao to Impose Anti-Smoking Law From Early 1997. MACAO, July 31 (Xinhua) -- A new law on the restriction of smoking, which extends non-smoking areas and limits advertisement of cigarettes, has been passed by the Macao legislative Assembly and will become effective from January 1, 1997. The new law has extended the non-smoking area to all places for health care, whether public or private, including clinics, chemist's shops and ambulance, places for people of under 16 years old, places producing or marketing inflammables, libraries, museums, public meeting halls, reading rooms, exhibition halls and within taxicabs. In addition, it rules that smoking is also banned in all passenger transportation vehicles, like buses and ships, and places for public reception. Violators of the rules will be fined between 250 Patacas (about 31.6 US dollars) and 10,000 Patacas (about 1,265.8 US dollars). Fines will double if the violator is found to have violated the rules for a second time within three months. Meanwhile, the law also imposes more strict restrictions over the advertisement of cigarettes. The number of smokers in Macao has been rising over recent years, and people have called for a more effective restriction on smoking.
19970530000000000	71 Cities, 3 Provinces Ban Smoking in Public Places. BEIJING, May 30 (Xinhua) -- Cigarette smoking in public has been outlawed in 71 major Chinese cities and three provinces, according the Chinese Association on Smoking &AMP; Health. "We believe the number of cities and province banning smoking at public places will go higher soon because the whole country is promoting an anti-smoking drive," Han Changlin, vice-president of the association, told Xinhua today. The smoking bans of these places mainly cover public transportation facilities, schools, cinemas, theaters, meeting halls, hospitals, department stores, museums, stadiums, and so on. Many big cities, such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing municipalities, and Guangzhou, Wuhan and Xi'an and other cities took similar measures after Changzhi of north China's Shanxi Province initiated the no-smoking law in November, 1989. The local legislative bodies passed regulations, or city governments published orders, to prohibit tobacco use in public. The provinces of Shanxi, Jilin, and Shandong also enacted the smoking bans. "It is urgent to step up anti-smoking measures, since smoking and second-hand smoking have become a serious public health hazard in China," Minister of Health Chen Minzhang said earlier this month. Health officials and experts said to ban smoking in public places should play a leading role in the anti-tobacco campaign in the country. China has some 350 million smokers and more than 400 million passive smokers, and the rate of teenage smoking is still on rise. Over 70 percent of lung cancer cases resulted from smoking, according to a study conducted by the Cancer Research Institute under the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer in Chinese cities with a population of more than one million, "Death toll related to tobacco use will climb to two million annually by the year 2020, from some 500,000 at present, if we don't take actions immediately," Minister Chen warned. Chinese authorities in charge of health and transportation have jointly prohibited tobacco from passenger trains, ships, planes, buses, subways, taxi cabs, ferry boats, cable cars, and waiting rooms at railway stations, airports, and seaports, from May 1. The action is a strong support to the country's endevours to create a clean and no-smoking environment for the Chinese people, the health officials said.
19971030000000000	Iran Bans Smoking in Public Places. TEHRAN, October 30 (Xinhua) -- Iranian cabinet here Wednesday approved a bill prohibiting smoking in public places in a move to intensify its nationwide anti-smoking campaign. The bill lists various public places to enforce the smoking ban, including holy sites, mosques, factories, hospitals and clinics, transportation terminals, public transport, department stores, and hotels and restaurants. Cultural places such as libraries, museums, cinemas, and sports halls, and corridors and waiting rooms in state organizations are also included. The cabinet ministers at today's session chaired by First Vice President Hassan Habibi stressed that all executive organizations and the mass media are duty-bound to campaign against smoking and to prevent any act that might encourage smoking, according to local reports.
19980103000000000	Diverse Reactions to New Anti-Smoking Law in California. LOS ANGELES, January 2 (Xinhua) -- The first day of the introduction of the law which bans smoking in California's bars and nightclubs ended with mixed reactions from the public. The new anti-smoking law, the strongest in the United States, went into effect in the small hours on January 1, 1998. The ban stems from California's indoor workplace smoking prohibition that started in 1994. According to the new law, bar owners will be fined up to 100 U.S. dollars for the first offense and 7,000 dollars for the second violation. Reporters from local newspapers based in Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco and other cities spent much time in New Year's Day in bars which were packed with patrons to interview with smokers, non-smokers, bar owners and policemen. In some bars, smokers went right on smoking despite waitresses had confiscated ashtrays at midnight. But in other bars, customers got in their last puffs before midnight, and then the smoke cleared. An organization called Californians for Smokers' Rights issued a statement on Thursday, calling for the repeal of the law. The organization argued, "the law deprives smokers of the right to consume a legal product within a private establishment." But other smokers seem not so assured. Although complaining and cursing the law, they smoked out of the bars. Some people also said that they would quit smoking because of the new law. The San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency urged residents to embrace the law and report violations. Anti-smoking activists were confident that people will become accustomed to the law. However, owners of bars and restaurants argued that the ban would severely hurt their business. California's Health Department hoped that most bar owners and patrons would eventually comply with the new law.
19980206000000000	German Parliament Rejects Tough Anti-Smoking Bill. BONN, February 5 (xinhua) -- The German parliament Thursday rejected a tough anti-smoking bill which tried to make public places, buses and working places free of smoking in Germany. Of the 626 deputies who cast ballots, 336 voted against the bill, 256 voted for it, and 34 abstained.
19980531000000000	China Intensifies Ban on Smoking in Public Places. BEIJING, May 31 (Xinhua) -- A total of 79 provinces and cities in China have formulated regulations banning smoking in public places, a senior Chinese health official announced today. Zhang Wenkang, minister of Health, made the announcement in a written speech marking the 11th "World No Tobacco Day", which falls on today. Zhang said that provinces and cities which have formulated smoking-ban regulations include the provinces of Shanxi, Jilin, Shandong, Jiangxi and Fujian, the municipalities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing, and 70 provincial capitals such as Guangzhou and Wuhan, as well as medium- and small-sized cities. China has about 320 million smokers. A survey shows that over 90 percent of smokers smoke in public places. Since smoking in a public place causes serious secondary smoking and has a bad impact on youngsters, China has taken the ban on smoking in public places as a key part of the ban on smoking in public places in its anti-smoking effort. A regulation banning smoking in public transport means and waiting areas was enacted in last May. However, these "smoking-control" cities only account for one-eighth of all the country's cities, according to an official with the National Committee for Patriotic Health campaign (NCPHC), who described it as a "long-term and arduous" task to promote work in this regard in all cities. Lu Ming with the NCPHC said that the rapid development of the country's tobacco industry in recent years has resulted in a substantial increase in the number of smokers. A survey shows that the ratio of adolescent and youth smokers in the age group of 15-25 increased by six percentage points in 1996 over 1984, and the average age for smoking the first cigarette moved to 19.7 from 22.4. However, Lu pointed out, China's efforts to control smoking is gaining increasing support from both smokers and non-smokers. According to a survey, 84 percent of the smokers and 89 percent of the non-smokers have become aware of the hazard caused by smoking to health. Meanwhile, 74 percent of the correspondents support government's effort to ban smoking in public places. The Beijing Municipal Committee for Patriotic Health Campaign awarded today a group of "smoking-free" schools and a group of educators who have done a good job in promoting smoking-control efforts. Activities to publicize the knowledge that smoking is hazardous  to health and keeping youngsters away from cigarettes were also conducted in busy commercial districts in the Chinese capital today.
19980601094600000	Jordan Reports Heavy Loss by Smoking. AMMAN, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Jordan, where one in four smokes, has complained of a great loss caused by smoking. Jordanian Anti-Smoking Society President Mohammad Shreim told a seminar Sunday that smoking costs Jordan at least 166 million Jordanian dinars (about 234 million U.S. dollars) a year in economic and public health losses. The seminar was held to mark the International Anti-Smoking Day. The figure was far more than the sum of revenues collected from domestic cigarette production and imports, Shreim was quoted by the semi-official Jordan Times Monday. Jordan's cigarette imports stand at 90 million dinars (about 127 million dollars) every year. Smokers in Jordan, accounting for nearly one-fourth of its 4.5 million inhabitants, spend 134 million dinars (about 190 million dollars) on cigarettes every year, Shreim said. Mohammad Ali Khan, who represents the World Health Organization at the seminar, said that Jordan has also found common grounds with other Middle East countries in the fact that the majority of its youths have slid into smoking. The fact predicted a worse picture of economic and public health situation for the kingdom in the future, he added. Jordan has enacted law banning smoking in public places, but many people ignore. Meanwhile, smuggling of foreign-made cigarettes is rampant in the country.
19980606000000000	S. Africa to Ban Smoking in Public. JOHANNESBURG, June 6 (Xinhua) -- Smokers across South Africa will soon be hounded out of many public places because a tough clamp-down on smoking in shops and banks will be imposed, Saturday Star paper reported. The controls, in terms of amendments to South Africa's tobacco laws, are due to be tabled in parliament shortly. Tobacco companies are considering whether to challenge the new law in the Constitutional Court, the report said. The draconian measures against smoking in public are in addition to the proposed ban on tobacco advertisements and sports sponsorship by tobacco companies. The new law will enable local authorities to ban smoking in public places and to designate areas where smoking is allowed, a health spokesman of the Gauteng province was quoted as saying. Gauteng, the economic powerhouse of South Africa, is gearing itself for the anti-smoking move, with regulations in the pipeline and ready to be implemented when the new law is promulgated, the spokesman said. Public places are defined as gyms, banks, hotels, libraries, post offices, schools, creches, shopping malls, retail stores, theaters, cinemas and stadiums. The amendments will also see a ban on smoking in municipal buildings and on public transport. Recent surveys show that one in three adult South Africans smoked, and the habit is growing among teenagers, at whom much of the tobacco advertising was aimed. Surveys also show that most South Africans support the state's proposal to ban smoking in public and regulate tobacco advertisement.
19980625181100000	HOUSE REPUBLICANS OUTLINE SKINNY ANTI-SMOKING BILL. WASHINGTON _ A week after Senate Republicans killed sweeping anti-smoking legislation, House GOP leaders on Thursday outlined a scaled-down bill to persuade teens not to smoke and urge states to lift the driving licenses of teens who do. Rep. Deborah Pryce, R-Ohio, who headed a House Republican task force that drafted the outline, provided few details about how the plan would work, saying that no decisions have been made about how much it would cost or who would pay for it. She said detailed legislation would be written by committee chairmen over the July 4th recess, which begins Friday and ends in mid-July. The GOP leadership outline urges states to enact laws penalizing minors who smoke by suspending their drivers' licenses and requiring them to perform community service. The plan was vague about the future powers of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to regulate tobacco, though it specifically urged that the FDA have the power to regulate cigarette manufacturing. The outline, which didn't mention any tax hikes to discourage smoking, appeared to have been timed so that Republican lawmakers could return to their districts over the July 4th recess and point to the outline as evidence that they are trying to do something to combat teen smoking. Republican lawmakers face a potential public backlash because Senate Republicans took the lead last week in killing tough anti-smoking legislation managed by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz. That bill would have raised the price of cigarettes by at least $1.10 a pack, expanded the federal government's ability to regulate tobacco advertising and marketing and imposed financial penalties on cigarette makers if they failed to reduce teen smoking. The House GOP outline was considerably less ambitious. Under the GOP plan, the director of the White House office of drug policy _ the ``drug czar'' _ would launch an anti-smoking and anti-drug publicity campaign, Pryce said. ``We want to show kids that smoking is dumb,'' Pryce said. Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, a member of the House leadership and a smoker himself, said the bill would seek to reduce underage smoking, but he added: ``Teen-agers are going to smoke. It's one of those rites of passage, if you will.'' Boehner also said the bill would not settle lawsuits against tobacco companies by state attorneys general or offer the industry any protection from lawsuits. ``That's not our business,'' Boehner said in an interview. ``This is an ongoing effort to go after what the American people want.'' The plan also would allow states to keep any money they win as a result of lawsuits against the tobacco companies, if their legal fees are ``reasonable'' and ``documented.'' Those suits typically seek reimbursement for state health-related costs, such as Medicaid payments. House Democratic Leader Richard A. Gephardt, D-Mo., denounced the Republican plan as ``an unprincipled attempt to spare tobacco companies from effective regulation.'' ``Instead of penalizing the tobacco companies for marketing their deadly wares to kids, they want to punish the kids who smoke,'' Gephardt said. ``This is a classic case of blaming the victim instead of the perpetrator.'' Gephardt said the Republican plan fails to give full authority to the FDA to regulate cigarettes, fails to propose penalties if tobacco companies don't curb teen smoking, and fails to restrict the industry from marketing to children. Long-time tobacco foe Rep. Henry A. Waxman, D-Calif., called the House Republican plan ``a sham'' designed to provide Republicans with political cover in the November elections. ``It's a fraud,'' Waxman said in an interview. ``But worse, it's a step backwards.'' Waxman said the Republican plan only ``pretends'' to give the Food and Drug Administration jurisdiction by allowing it to regulate cigarette manufacturing. ``This is a payback to the tobacco companies for the $12 million that Republicans have received in political contributions since 1995,'' Waxman said. But Rep. James V. Hansen, R-Utah, who has sponsored a tough anti-smoking bill along with Waxman and Rep. Marty Meehan, D-Mass., that would boost the price of a pack of cigarettes by $1.50, was more positive about the Republican leadership's plan. ``The leadership proposal is only a very rough skeleton,'' Hansen said. ``I think we can work this out.'' McCain said in an interview that the House GOP proposal falls short in several areas. For example, McCain said revoking driving licenses of teen smokers would do little to stop tobacco use by those too young to drive. ``What do you do with 15, 14, 13 and 12-year-olds?'' he said. McCain also said he is skeptical that any anti-smoking bill would discourage underage smoking unless it hikes tobacco prices. ``I know of no one who believes that you can effectively address the kid's smoking issue without raising the price of cigarettes,'' McCain said.
19980708074800000	Thai police vow to enforce anti-smoking laws. BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ Police in Thailand have announced they will start enforcing a law banning smoking in public places, Thai newspapers reported Wednesday. 
19981023082600000	EDS: ADDS background, details on bill, quotes throughout; ADDS. CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) _ A drastic anti-smoking bill cleared a key legislative hurdle in Parliament on Friday, paving the way for clamp downs on advertising and tobacco use at work and public places. 
19981104132400000	South Africa on way to passing one of world's toughest anti-smoking. CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) _ No smoking in enclosed public places except in designated areas. No tobacco advertising. Even ads for non-tobacco products would not be allowed to show people smoking cigarettes. 
19981112211700000	South Africa's `Nanny of the Nation' inspires love and hate. CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) _ Love her or loathe her, she is impossible to ignore. 
19981211210800000	No-smoking laws are scoffed at in some countries. NEW YORK (AP) _ Smokers on the go are always a step ahead in plotting when and where they can get that next nicotine fix. 
19981211211300000	NEW YORK: the law.. GERMANY: Health-conscious Germans are drinking less beer and eating leaner meat, but they still like their cigarettes. Big ``No Smoking'' signs hang at subway entrances in Berlin, but, recognizing the inevitable, there are ashtrays on the platforms. In February, parliament easily defeated the first attempt to regulate smoking nationwide. 
19990112004100000	SMOKING BAN HAS NOT HURT RESTAURANTS, ANALYSTS SAY. NEW YORK _ Since the city banned smoking in restaurants in 1995, restaurateurs have complained that the prohibition is bad for business. On Monday, a group of academic researchers, admittedly anti-smoking ones, released a series of six analyses suggesting that the ban has not hurt. The studies indicated that the anti-smoking law, which took effect on April 10, 1995, has had no effect on local sales, job growth or income. The studies, which were financed by the Substance Abuse Policy Research Program, which receives money from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, showed that restaurant industry jobs rose 18 percent from 1993 to 1997, to 19,347. During the same period, sales tax receipts rose 2 percent at restaurants in the city but dropped 4 percent in the rest of the state. The number of restaurants in the city during that period increased 6 percent. At a news conference, the researchers characterized their work as the first comprehensive look at the city's ban on smoking in restaurants with 35 or more seats. They said earlier studies suggesting economic harm were smaller and were financed by the tobacco industry. ``Local officials can now go about their business of protecting the public from the toxins in second-hand smoke without worrying about this phony issue,'' said Dr. Stanton Glantz, who wrote an editorial accompanying the articles, which are published in the January issue of Public Health Management and Practice. Mike O'Neal, who owns O'Neal's restaurant on West 64th Street, near Lincoln Center, supported the ban, saying it has helped his business. ``If 75 percent of people don't smoke and 25 percent do, that means 75 percent are going to eat out more and 25 percent are going to eat out less,'' he said at the news conference. Others in the restaurant industry took sharp issue with the studies' methodology and conclusions. Scott Wexler, executive director of the Empire State Restaurant and Tavern Association, a trade group, said in an interview that his group sponsored a study in 1996 that showed jobs at city restaurants declining 4 percent. He said that since his group's study examined statistics for the months just before and after the law took effect, it could isolate more fairly the ``cataclysmic'' influence of the smoking ban on business. Wexler said his group's study showed retail jobs going up 2 percent at the same time that restaurant jobs dropped 4 percent, suggesting that something beyond general economic trends was at work, he said. Dan Tubridy, who owns Pier 92, a restaurant in Rockaway Beach, Queens, said in an interview that he lost customers immediately. ``They said that if they couldn't eat at my place they were going to Nassau County, pure and simple,'' he said. ``And you know what happens? They don't come back.'' Wexler also pointed out that 8,000 of 15,000 restaurants included in the overall sales tax figures were small enough to allow smoking or were primarily bars, where smoking is also allowed. The study conducted by Dr. Andrew Hyland, a biostatistician, and two colleagues at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, acknowledged this limitation. The restaurant trade group is heavily supported by the Tobacco Institute, which recently admitted funneling $443,072 to the group, after earlier claiming a far lower amount. The money was used to lobby the state Legislature for less stringent laws than the city's. The studies also concluded that the law has been enforced very effectively. An examination of city records, one study said, showed that city health inspectors found smoking at only 2 percent of the 251 restaurants they visited. Another study indicated that 90 percent of restaurant owners reported that their indoor areas were smoke-free. Three out of four restaurateurs reported that complying with the law cost them no money. Several researchers said the next step would be a dual effort: to pass laws like the city's in other counties, and to extend the city law to bars, both those within restaurants and free-standing ones. ``A bar is a workplace,'' said Dr. John Seffin, chief executive of the American Cancer Society. ``You should not be allowed to smoke in a workplace.''
20000118180300000	Canada Eyes Graphic Smoke Warnings. TORONTO (AP) -- Photos of diseased organs would cover up to 50 percent of cigarette packaging under a proposal expected to be announced on Canada's national anti-smoking day, ``Weedless Wednesday.'' Health Minister Alan Rock has been studying the matter for more than a year, and persistent news reports said he would formally propose the new warning regulations on Wednesday. A ministry spokesman refused to comment on the proposal. If approved by the government after public hearings and other steps in the regulatory process, the warnings would be the first anywhere to include graphic photos of diseased organs, according to Cynthia Callard of Physicians for a Smoke-Free Canada. ``Showing a picture of a brain that's been destroyed is a much stronger way of getting the message across,'' she said. Canada has stiffened anti-smoking regulations in recent years. Smoking is generally prohibited in public places such as government buildings and auditoriums, and some areas ban smoking in bars and restaurants. Health warnings on cigarettes were required until the Supreme Court in 1995 struck down portions of the Tobacco Products Control Act as unconstitutional. Cigarette makers continued including health warnings voluntarily, and a new Tobacco Act passed in 1997 left it to the government to impose any regulations on health warnings. The tobacco industry has challenged other aspects of the 1997 Tobacco Act in court, contending it amounts to a ban on cigarette advertising and therefore infringes on free expression guaranteed by the Charter of Rights. The case is pending. Robert Parker, president of the Canadian Tobacco Manufacturer's Council, was quoted by The Globe and Mail newspaper as saying that the industry has been left out of consultations on the government's health warning plans. He questioned whether the graphic images under consideration could be reproduced on packages, and said the industry previously agreed with the government that cigarette packages should have warnings but disagreed over what the warnings should say and how large they should be. In the United States, cigarette makers are required to include warning labels on packages. Two U.S. senators, Democrat Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey and Republican Richard Lugar of Indiana, intend to propose legislation this year that would require the warnings to be worded more clearly and directly, and to include a list of all ingredients and cancer-causing agents in cigarettes, Lautenberg's office said Wednesday.
20000118201800000	Whitman vetoes bills designed to crack down on underage smoking. The governor also vetoed a bill that would have gone after underage drinkers in private homes, saying it would have taken the long arm of state government "too far into private family conduct." Both bills were pushed by lawmakers who said more needs to be done to curb teen smoking and drinking. In both cases, Whitman essentially said: Good idea, but not the best plan of attack. Because both bills passed in the waning days of the 208th Legislature, Whitman's vetoes stand. Lawmakers can introduce the bills again during the current two-year session. The smoking bill, A-2254, would have forbidden underage smokers from possessing cigarettes in public places such as streets, schools, parks and shopping centers. Underage smokers caught puffing in public or possessing tobacco products could have been hit with a $25 fine for first-time offenders. The fine would have been suspended, however, until a minor attended a class that teaches why smoking is bad. Repeat offenders would have been ordered to perform up to 15 hours of community service. Sponsors said the bill was intended to send a strong message about smoking to teens. However, anti-smoking groups opposed the bill, saying no studies show such a crackdown actually cuts down on youth smoking. Whitman said in her veto message that anti-smoking groups told her "this is not the most effective or efficient use of public resources to combat smoking by young people." The governor also said she worried that the bill "may inadvertently harm community policing efforts aimed at building positive relationships between police and juveniles, and will draw youths into the municipal court system." Assemblyman Joseph Suliga, D-Union, a sponsor of the bipartisan bill, said he believed it was killed "by misinformation." "Every year New Jersey continues to delay measures that keep young people away from tobacco, another 36,000 kids will begin smoking," Suliga said. "Obviously, the steps that have been undertaken in reducing tobacco's appeal to youngsters have not had much impact. The primary purpose of my bill was to break outside the bounds of traditional youth tobacco control programs and educate kids on the immediate consequences of smoking." Suliga said some police chiefs told him the bill would not harm community police efforts. Larry Downs, director of NJ Breathes, an anti-smoking group, said the bill's "unintended effect" would have been to send the message that tobacco use is acceptable for those who turn 18. "There is no research that says this approach was going to work," said Downs. "We'd rather see the money go to good tobacco control policies." Whitman also vetoed S-1617, which lawmakers said would crack down on underage drinkers who imbibe in private homes. Underage drinking is already prohibited in public places, and sponsors said this bill would solve a problem they say is particularly acute during summers at the Jersey shore. The governor, however, said the bill could go too far. "I am concerned that the prohibitions could be construed to apply to situations in which an underage person consumes even a small amount of alcohol under the watchful eye of an adult family member, such as a grandparent," Whitman said. "Application of this bill in such situations may intrude too far into private family conduct."
20000901000000000	Smoking Ban Approved by Italian Government. ROME, September 1 (Xinhua) -- Lighting up in public and private indoor areas throughout Italy could draw hefty fines under a smoking ban that was formally approved Friday by Italy's cabinet. The sweeping ban allows for designated smoking zones in ventilated areas, but calls for stiff fines against those who violate the ban. All publicly and privately owned indoor places open to the public are covered by the bill, including bars, restaurants, prisons and police stations. Owners, managers and designated "smoke-busters" who fail to apply the norms are also subject to fines though the cabinet Friday agreed to reduce the penalty. The proposed fines would range from 100,000-300,000 lire (about 50-150 U.S. dollars) for anyone who lights up. The ban was drafted by Italian Health Minister Umberto Veronesi and previously approved on first reading by the cabinet and by the State-Region Conference, and it will go into effect after being upheld by the parliament. Veronesi, one of Europe's leading cancer specialists, has announced a crusade against smoking, saying that too many Italians still die of lung cancer caused by cigarette smoke. An estimated 1 million people, or 24.5 percent of the population, in Italy smoke cigarettes though figures compiled by the national statistics bureau Istat show that the percentage of smokers nationwide has fallen by nearly 1 percent since 1993. According to Veronesi, the proceeds from the fines will be used to fund anti-smoking campaigns, Veronese said.
20000904143500000	Ruling adds caution to anti-smoking laws. TRENTON, N.J. (AP) - A handful of New Jersey towns considering developing local smoking bans may have second thoughts after last week's court ruling striking down Princeton's broad anti-smoking ordinance. ''It will certainly put a damper on and intimidate the (communities considering new local smoking restrictions) from moving ahead,'' Regina Carlson, executive director of the anti-smoking nonprofit New Jersey GASP, told The Times of Trenton for Monday's editions. Bans are in place already in several towns, but none of the existing anti-smoking ordinances are as sweeping as the one in Princeton, which would have been the strictest in the state. It prohibited lighting up in bars, restaurants and workplaces, restricting smoking to homes, cigar shops or outdoors. Violators faced fines from $100 to $1,000. In the 64-page ruling, Superior Court Assignment Judge Linda R. Feinberg said the Princeton Regional Health Commission did not have the authority to enact the ban for fire-safety purposes. The judge also held that the ordinance is pre-empted by state law. Carlson said a few New Jersey towns - including Cherry Hill and Ocean City - had considered implementing a similar ban, but were waiting for the outcome of the Princeton case. Ocean City Mayor Henry Knight said the proposed anti-smoking measure there likely will be dropped following the advice of the city solicitor. Rutgers University law professor Robert Williams said the future of anti-smoking laws in other towns depends on whether the decision last Tuesday is upheld on appeal. ''It's only one judge's decision until there's a more authoritative decision from an appeals court,'' he said. The health commission has not yet decided whether to appeal.
