10000000000000000	Hugo Chavez What have been the key policies and outcomes  good or bad  of the Venezuelan Presidency of Hugo Chavez  What supportive or critical statements or actions have come from Venezuelans or leaders of other countries.
19980612203700000	have moved separately.. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _ A center-left party on Friday endorsed a former coup leader's bid to become Venezuela's next president, a move that could soften the candidate's image and attract young voters. 
19981109111800000	Elections boost ex-coup leader's movement in Venezuela. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _ A left-wing coalition led by a former coup leader has become the top force in Venezuela's new Congress, initial results showed Monday, in a major setback for the two political parties that have governed for 40 years since the restoration of democracy. 
19981206231000000	Former coup leader Hugo Chavez elected president of Venezuela. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _ Former Lt. Col. Hugo Chavez, who staged a bloody coup attempt six years ago, was elected president of Venezuela _ a stunning blow to the political and economic establishment that has ruled for 40 years. 
19981208101800000	Venezuelan stock market opens strongly after Chavez victory. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _ The Caracas stock market skyrocketed Tuesday morning, indicating that president-elect Hugo Chavez's conciliatory comments had eased investor fears that he would roll back free market economic policies. 
19981208202600000	MAN IN THE NEWS: HUGO CHAVEZ FRIAS, THE NEXT PRESIDENT OF VENEZUELA  (JT). CARACAS, Venezuela _ With his landslide victory Sunday securing his place as the next president of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez Frias might have been expected to smooth over the tracks of his first attempt to storm the presidential palace here, in 1992, in case other revolutionaries got the same idea. Instead, he highlighted the failed coup, along with the day he left prison two years later. ``What we're living through in Venezuela is the continuation of February 4, 1992,'' Chavez told crowds of euphoric supporters, many sporting his trademark military-style red beret, who had turned out to revel in the triumph of the man they call ``El Commandante.'' There was good reason for Chavez to celebrate the doomed revolt. For the 44-year-old former paratrooper, the coup forged his credentials as the undeniable outsider, whose day would come as Venezuela's economy sank deeper and its people grew more doubtful of the traditional ruling class. Chavez's victory has opened not so much a new page, as a new tome, in Venezuelan politics. At a time when the rest of Latin America has been moving largely toward streamlining the role of government and selling off state assets, Chavez speaks of subordinating the state oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela, to domestic priorities, and asks whether $9 billion earmarked for operations and investment by the oil company should not go to shore up decaying schools and hospitals instead. Chavez soared to victory on fiery rhetoric that promised fry the heads of traditional political bosses but he immediately soften his message upon victory to persuade investors that Venezuela was still safe for them. On Tuesday, in the first day of trading after the election, the tiny Caracas stock exchange jumped a record 22 percent and the currency strengthened against the dollar after a long slide. Though Chavez failed to overthrow former President Carlos Andres Perez, the coup succeeded in other ways: it took the place of party machinery and war chests, celebrity endorsements and hours of campaign ads. Even as he languished in prison, the mystique grew of the restless lieutenant colonel condemned for trying to destroy a system that many Venezuelans recognized as rotted but felt powerless to remedy. ``He was seen as someone who told the truth about the system,'' said one diplomatic analyst. In 1994, after President Rafael Caldera freed Chavez _ in a bid to deflate the commandante's swelling popularity _ Chavez created his Fifth Bolivarian Movement and began taking his war on corruption to the hinterlands. The son of school teachers who grew up poor in the state of Barinas, he surrounded himself with a contradictory klatch of right-wing nationalists from the military and other figures hailing from the left. With such an odd mix, some political analysts thought he would go nowhere. Last December, opinion polls showed him with less than 12 percent support among likely voters. But slowly, perhaps even unconsciously, his red-bereted image was moving in from the fringes, to dominate the political scene. ``What people hadn't counted on was the real depth of disgust Venezuelans had for traditional politics,'' said the diplomat. The colonel also benefited from a souring economy and a beauty queen's mistakes. Until last spring, Irene Saez, a former Miss Universe, had been leading in voter surveys, peaking at 35.7 percent to Chavez's 20.6 percent. Then the price of oil, which underpins Venezuela's entire economy, fell steeply. ``We went from an optimistic country to a pessimistic one, with expectations that things will get worse,'' said Luis Vicente Leon, director of the Datanalysis polling agency. The following month, Miss Saez accepted a luke warm endorsement from one of the two traditional parties. The backing compromised her claims to being an outsider and her popularity ratings slid into the single digits. Next, it was the turn of Henrique Salas Roemer, a former governor of Carabobo State, educated at Yale. Salas, 62, climbed aboard a white horse, called Frijolito, or Little Bean, for campaign rallies. But his claims to being a warrior for the people also weakened with a last-minute endorsement from the major parties. Salas rode Frijolito through the streets of Caracas for his final rally. Indeed, in the final vote, Chavez, who was frequently criticized for altering his positions depending on his audiences, succeeded in capturing some 40 percent of the upper and middle-class vote, on top of his bedrock support among the poor, said Leon. Chavez plans to hold a referendum Feb. 15 to rewrite the Constitution, which some political opponents fear could be a mechanism for concentrating power in his office. While Chavez gives voice _ and a roaring one at that _ to Venezuela's downtrodden, some fear that populist economic policies will set the clock back here. Chavez spoke out against privatizing health care, which he called ``the right of all Venezuelans,'' and has raised the prospect of a debt moratorium or a grace period for foreign debt, which he said amounts to 40 percent of the national budget. He has vowed to raise the minimum wage of just under $200 a month, which covers only half the cost of the standard food basket for a family's minimal nutritional needs. ``As president, he's going to try to deliver on his campaign promises,'' said Robert Bottome, a publisher of VenEconomy newsletters, ``The economy will go into a big tailspin and then the question is, what does he do?'' &QL;
19981209142500000	Venezuela stocks soar again after former coup leader wins. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _ President-elect Hugo Chavez said Wednesday he was ``completely sure'' Washington would reverse its policy of banning him from the United States. Local stocks soared after his election, he said, because ``we have demonstrated to the world that we are not savages.'' 
19981212195100000	Oil ministers to discuss oil policy in Madrid. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) _Venezuelan, Mexican and Saudi oil ministerial delegations will meet in Madrid sometime next week to discuss the effectiveness of the three countries' oil policy, Venezuelan President-elect Hugo Chavez said late Saturday. 
19981215000000000	Venezuela's President-Elect Seeks South American Unity. CARACAS, December 14 (Xinhua) -- Venezuela's President-elect Hugo Chavez said on Monday that his upcoming visit to Brazil, Argentina and Colombia aims to boost Latin American unity. "Venezuela must play an important role in the Mercosur, the Andean community, the Caribbean, and Central America," Chavez said. Chavez will start his three-nation tour on Tuesday. He will first visit Brazil where he is expected to meet with Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso at a private lunch in the palace of Alvorada. Chavez is also scheduled to meet with Brazilian Foreign Affairs Minister Sebastiao Do Rego Barros, and give a news conference after the meeting. Diplomats said Chavez will brief the Cardoso government on his foreign policy for the next five years and explain his economic and trade plans to local businessmen. On Wednesday, Chavez will travel to Argentina. He will end his three-nation trip with a visit to Colombia on Thursday.
19990102000000000	Venezuela's Foreign Exchange Reserves Drop in 1998. CARACAS, January 1 (Xinhua) -- Venezuela's foreign exchange reserves closed the year 1998 at 14.85 billion U.S. dollars, down 16.64 percent compared with 1997, the Central Bank of Venezuela said Friday. The bank attributed the drop to foreign debt payments and central bank policies to defend the Venezuelan currency, the bolivar, as well as speculative attacks on markets, electoral expectations and the adverse scenario created by the falling oil prices. However, the bank said the existing foreign reserves would be enough to cover imports for at least 11 months. The bolivar faced great pressure last August and September, but strong intervention by the central bank on the exchange market and an increase in interest rates helped curb market speculation. The value of the Venezuelan currency recovered after the landslide victory of Hugo Chavez in the presidential elections on December 6. It afterwards underwent moderate depreciation.
19990201000000000	Venezuela to Continue "One-China" Policy: President-Elect. CARACAS, January 31 (Xinhua) -- Venezuelan president-elect Hugo Chavez met with Chinese Agriculture Minister Chen Yaobang here Sunday, saying that his new government attaches great importance to relations with China and will continue the "one-China" policy. Chen, who acts as a special envoy of the Chinese government to attend Chavez' inauguration ceremony slated for Monday, conveyed President Jiang Zemin's congratulations to Chavez and invitation for him to visit China. Chavez said he hoped for an early trip to China, as his government set high store by developing relations with China. He stressed that the new government would maintain the "one-China" policy. The two men also exchanged views on promoting friendly cooperation between Venezuela and China. Later in the day, the Chinese envoy held talks with Venezuela's newly appointed Foreign Minister Jose Vicente Rangel and Agriculture Minister Alejandro Riera respectively.
19990203000000000	Venezuela to Seek Integration With Latin American Nations. CARACAS, February 2 (Xinhua) -- Venezuela's new foreign minister, Jose Vicente Rangel, on Tuesday said his country will seek closer links with the Caribbean countries while boosting ties with the Andean Community of which it is a member. The foreign policy of Venezuela's new president Hugo Chavez, who was sworn in Tuesday, would be based on peace, integration and the defense of human rights, Rangel said. He said the new administration was aiming to trim a bloated bureaucracy in the foreign ministry, and to revamp and modernize it. Rangel said that Chavez had a friendly relationship with U.S. President Bill Clinton, with whom he already met as president- elect and will again meet at the end of this month during a trip to the United States. Referring to Cuba, Rangel said that Venezuela wants closer ties with the island disregarding ideological differences. "We call for respect for the Cuban people. We ask for an end to the embargo," he said. Rangel said many Venezuelan businessmen were planning to invest in Cuba.
19990203180900000	VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT PLEDGES TO REWRITE CONSTITUTION  (DW). CARACAS, Venezuela _ In his first hours in office, President Hugo Chavez Frias sent tremors through the political establishment by moving to rewrite the Constitution in a process that is highly likely to replace the newly elected Congress with one that has more of his allies. For Chavez and his supporters, the 1961 Constitution is a symbol of a corrupt political system that has fed popular resentment and apathy. It was written by leaders of the two traditional parties, Accion Democratica and Copei, to keep Marxist groups aligned at the time with Cuban-backed guerrillas out of the political process. Now, Marxist and socialist groups in the coalition that elected Chavez sorely want to replace the document. As he took his oath of office on Tuesday, Chavez called the Constitution moribund even as he pledged to uphold it. ``The Constitution, and with it the ill-fated political system to which it gave birth 40 years ago, has to die,'' Chavez said in his address. ``It is going to die, Sirs. Accept it!'' In the campaign leading to his landslide victory in December, Chavez said that he wanted to replace the ban on presidential re-election, opening the way for him to run for a second five-year term in 2003. That led to warnings from opponents that Chavez, who as an army officer started an unsuccessful coup against the civilian government in 1992, was still a power-seeking authoritarian. Chavez also said he hoped that a new Constitution would take politics out of the judiciary by replacing the congressional appointment of judges with one based on selection by a board of legal scholars. He expressed hopes that a new Constitution would also replace the system in which party bosses manage the selection of congressional candidates and then control their votes. In the campaigns last year, Chavez's opponents said that a referendum to form an assembly with powers to draft a new constitution would be unconstitutional. But last month the Supreme Court backed Chavez's position, and congressional leaders said that Congress should call for the referendum. On Tuesday, Chavez issued the referendum decree, saying that Congress should focus its energies on economic policy. His decree set in motion a year of campaigning over three referendums, one on whether to rewrite the Constitution, a second to elect delegates to the assembly that would rewrite the Constitution and a third on ratifying it. Some opposition leaders criticized Chavez for circumventing Congress. But most, apparently reluctant to take on Chavez at the height of his popularity, had words of mild praise. ``This is a government that needs cooperation,'' said Alcibiades Castro, congressional leader of Copei. Chavez hopes that a series of ballot victories over the next year will bolster his support among voters as he takes unpopular measures like slashing government payrolls and imposing new taxes. Many legislators, all elected to five-year terms, widely are expected to resign to run for the assembly. Chavez's coalition holds about a third of the seats in each chamber. ``President Chavez believes by making the Congress more representative it will be more favorable to him,'' a Western diplomat who insisted on anonymity said. ``This process gets him off to a very powerful start.''
19990504125510000	U.S., Cuba Struggle Off the Field. WASHINGTON (AP) -- Americans and Cubans traded high-fives and  handshakes on baseball diamonds in Baltimore and Havana. But in the diplomatic arena, it's hardball of another sort. The friendly sports competition was on display when the Orioles  played a Cuban all-star team Monday night, and five weeks ago when the two squared off in Cuba, with Baltimore winning 3-2 in 11 innings. It was a case of ``Baseball Si, Politics No.'' That's in marked  contrast to the four-decade-old U.S.-Cuba government feud. A case in point is the recently concluded spring session of the  53-member U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva. Normally, the United States and Cuba engage in long-distance  verbal volleying. In Geneva, however, it was a close-quarter diplomatic battle over a U.S.-backed resolution criticizing Cuba's human rights policy. The resolution expressed concern at the ``continued violation of  human rights and fundamental freedoms in Cuba, such as freedom of expression, association and assembly and rights associated with the administration of justice.'' On the surface, it seemed an unequal struggle, involving the  world's richest and most powerful country and a small poor neighbor that sticks by an old-style communist system widely discredited elsewhere. The commission takes up an anti-Cuba resolution each year,  usually introduced by the United States. This year, Cuba was tossed a diplomatic curve ball when two former communist allies of Cuba -- the Czech Republic and Poland -- introduced it. A wrathful Cuban delegation derided the Czechs and Poles, saying  they were ``doing the dirty work of the United States.'' Carlos Lage, one of President Fidel Castro's most trusted lieutenants, set the tone, insisting it was unseemly for the United States to pass judgment on Cuba's human rights situation. Lage contended nearly 1 million Americans are homeless, 43  million have no health insurance and 20 percent are functional illiterates. In contrast, he asked: ``Where, in Cuba, are the illiterates,  the children without schools and the teachers without classrooms? Where is there a single citizen without health care coverage?'' He derided U.S. policies toward Cuba, including an economic  embargo, as ``criminal, failed and ridiculous.'' Indeed, the embargo, which was eased earlier this year to allow  more regulated sales of food and pesticides, elicits a measure of sympathy for Cuba internationally. Many countries sense that American hostility toward the island has contributed to the rigidity of Cuba's internal policies. It is one reason some countries close ranks behind Cuba each  year on the anti-Cuba resolution. In 1998, it was defeated 19-16, with 18 abstentions. This year, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright left nothing to  chance. She telephoned at least five Latin American foreign ministers seeking support for the resolution. The day of the vote, her top aides lobbied into the early hours. Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, an avowed admirer of Castro,  also worked the phones, urging his Latin American colleagues to vote ``no.'' In response, the State Department's top aide for economic affairs, Alan Larson, abruptly canceled long-planned economic consultations in Caracas. Castro himself was busy lobbying. He requested a week's  postponement in the Geneva vote so he could do some arm twisting at a Caribbean regional summit in the Dominican Republic in mid-April. Perhaps the most controversial bid for support occurred when El  Salvador agreed to abstain from the vote after Cuba promised to commute the death sentences of two Salvadorans convicted in 1997 hotel bombings in Cuba. One problem for Cuba, however, was the conviction of four  dissidents who were sentenced in March to prison terms of 3 1/2 to 5 years. Cuba said the four were guilty of ``incitement to sedition.'' Also, Cuba had a new law imposing sentences of up to 20 years on  Cubans found to be cooperating with U.S. attempts to promote a transition to democracy in Cuba. Cuba's critics saw the law as punishment for independent thinkers. Cuba says it is merely an attempt to punish those who collaborate with the enemy. After four weeks of jockeying, the resolution passed April 23 on  a vote of 21-20, with 12 abstentions. When the tally was announced, one Cuban delegate wept. For Cuba, some of the sting from that vote may have been eased  by the outcome Monday night in Baltimore: Cuba 12, Orioles 6.
19990507151531000	Venezuela To Sell Electric Cos.. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) -- The government of President Hugo  Chavez, who campaigned for office deriding what he called savage capitalism and neoliberal free-market policies, plans to privatize three electric utilities by year end. Talks have been held with potential investors for the three  companies, Enelco, Enerven and Enelbar, said Antonio Giner, the newly appointed head of the Venezuelan Investment Fund. He remained tightlipped on prices. Giner also reiterated the government's plan to sell all the  assets of Venalum, an aluminum operation that makes 430,000 tons a year. Giner said Venezuela is also seeking a partner Alcasa, a smaller aluminum producer. The comments were the government's first formal announcement  concerning the sale of state assets. Chavez criticized such policies during last year's electoral campaign, but has softened his position. The government is selling the companies as part of its plan to  close a record budget deficit of $8 billion. Chavez, the leader of a failed 1992 coup attempt, took office  three months ago.
19990704154015000	Latin American Briefs /. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) -- In the latest attack on Venezuela's  president, a leading writer says Hugo Chavez is imposing authoritarian rule on one of Latin America's longest-running democracies. Arturo Uslar Pietri, one of the nation's most famous writers,  criticized Chavez's promotion of 34 military officials without congressional approval as required by law and his declaration last week that Congress should be temporarily shut down. He described the president's actions as a ``coup d'etat,'' said the El Universal newspaper Sunday. But Chavez, a former army paratrooper who led a failed 1992 coup  attempt in the name of the poor, shot back at his critics Sunday, describing them as part of a corrupt political elite that has ruined the oil-rich country. ------ RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) -- The Brazilian government plans to  sell off billions of dollars' worth of state properties, ranging from buildings and empty lots to beaches and ecological reserves. The state, which owns three million properties worth an  estimated $400 billion, will sell off as many assets as it can to the highest bidder at auctions later this year, the newspaper O Globo reported Saturday. Administrative Secretary Claudia Costin, who ordered a study to  evaluate each property, said the buyers will not be allowed to erect buildings on lands that are now ecological reserves. Since President Fernando Henrique Cardoso assumed power in 1995,  privatizations have been a major part of his economic policies. The Cardoso administration has sold off state mining, railway  and utility companies, including the largest privatization in Latin American history. Last July, the telecommunications giant Telebras fetched the equivalent of $19 billion. ------ RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) -- Brazil's military is investigating  reports that Peruvian guerrillas have infiltrated a remote border region in the Amazon jungle, a newspaper reported Sunday. Shining Path guerrillas have reportedly built a supply base in  the western Amazon basin state of Acre, near Brazil's border with Peru and Colombia, the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil said. The air force says it will increase its monitoring in the Acre  border region; the army says it will build a fort there within a year.
19990709150012000	Latin American Briefs /. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) -- Colombia's trade minister should have  minded her own business when she criticized Venezuelan trade policy, her Venezuelan counterpart said Friday. The Colombian minister, Martha Lucia Ramirez, this week  criticized a Venezuelan law requiring Colombian truck drivers to hand their cargo over Venezuelan drivers at the border. In an interview with the Caracas daily El Nacional, she said  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez ``talks about integration, but the measures applied by some of his officials are just the opposite.'' Ramirez's comments were an ``undue interference in the internal  affairs of the country,'' Venezuelan Trade Minister Gustavo Marquez said in a radio interview Friday. Venezuela said the law was necessary because its drivers were at  a disadvantage. Few Venezuelan drivers venture into Colombia because of the presence of leftist rebels and paramilitary squads. ------ SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador (AP) -- A group representing 29,000  public school teachers announced a series of strikes Friday to demand the government grant them a 30 percent salary increase. Felipe Rivera, secretary-general of the Association of  Salvadoran Educators, said the strikes would take place Tuesday in all 14 of the country's provinces as well as on July 20 and 21. Salaries now range between $345 and $505 per month, according to  the Salvadoran education ministry. Education minister Evelyn Jacir de Lovo has dismissed the idea  of salary increases, instead saying she would institute incentives to reward the best teachers starting next year.
19990725000000000	Xinhua World Economic News Summary at GMT 0530, July 25. CARACAS -- Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez expressed his concern Saturday over a lawsuit filed by a group of small U.S. oil producers about alleged unfair practices in Venezuelan and Mexican oil prices. In his letter to U.S. President Bill Clinton, published by the Presidency of the Republic, Chavez called on Clinton's attention to the matter, considered to be "of utmost importance" for Venezuela. (Venezuela-US-Oil) - - - - SANTIAGO -- Chile's economic activity dropped 3.1 percent in the first five months of the year, the biggest decline since 1983, when it plunged 6.83 percent, the Central Bank announced Saturday. The Economic Activity Index (Imacec) issued by the Central Bank shows that the steepest fall occurred in April, when it fell 6 percent from the same period of 1998. The bank blamed the plummet on the country's adjustment policy introduced last year, lower prices of exports in the international markets and the drought in recent months.(Chile- Economy) - - - - BAGHDAD -- Iraq and Tunisia started trade talks here on Saturday and the two countries pledged to expand commercial exchanges, the Iraqi News Agency (INA) reported. The talks were co-chaired by Iraqi Trade Minister Mohammed Mehdi Saleh and his Tunisian counterpart Mondher Zenaidi, said INA. Saleh reiterated in the talks Iraq's readiness to expand commercial exchanges with Arab countries. (Iraq-Tunisia-Trade Talks) - - - - DHAKA -- Bangladesh's export of raw jute declined by 26 percent in the just-concluded 1998-99 fiscal year as compared with that in the previous year, The Financial Express reported Saturday. The country earned 3.24 billion taka (2.02 million U.S. dollars) by exporting 1.76 million bales (one bale equivalent to 180 kilograms) in the last fiscal year, against 4.3 billion taka (86.9 million dollars) from the export of 2.4 million bales of raw jute in the previous fiscal year, the report said, quoting sources of the Bangladesh Jute Association. (Bangladesh-Jute Export)
19990726000000000	Venezuela's Constitutional Assembly Elected. CARACAS, July 25 (Xinhua) -- Elections of Venezuela's Constitutional Assembly ended Sunday with President Hugo Chavez's supporters winning 123 out of the 131 seats. His supporters garnered 96 percent of the votes, Chavez announced after the election results came out. Describing the elections as a most important chapter in Venezuela's history, Chavez said the Constitutional Assembly could dissolve Congress and the Supreme Court while he would recommend that the Constitutional Assembly change the country's official name to "the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela." Besides amending the 1961 Constitution, the Constitutional Assembly will carry out a series of reforms including installing a premier post and reshuffling the government, Chavez said. Determined to rebuild impoverished Venezuela through a series of political and social reforms, Chavez has campaigned hard for a Constitutional Assembly with broader power.
19990812000000000	Chavez Sworn in Again As Venezuelan President. CARACAS, August 11 (Xinhua) -- Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who symbolically resigned last week, on Wednesday was sworn in as president before the National Constitutional Assembly (NCA). Chavez, elected in the December presidential elections, testified as president for the first time on February 2 this year. Last Thursday, Chavez offered his resignation to the NCA and called on the NCA to rewrite the country's present constitution, which has been in effect since 1961. But his resignation was rejected by the NCA, controlled by Chavez's supporters. Among his proposals for a new constitution, Chavez called on the NCA to extend the presidential term from five years to six years and to allow all incumbents to be re-elected. But Chavez's bid to rewrite the 1961 national charter was strongly opposed by the Supreme Court and Congress, both controlled by opposition parties.
19990902210011000	Two Venezuelan Oil Executives Resign. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) -- Two more high-level executives  resigned from Venezuela's powerful state oil monopoly on Thursday, following the company head's resignation in a dispute over production and management policies. Roberto Mandini resigned Monday as president of Petroleos de  Venezuela, the world's third largest oil company and one of the top two suppliers to the United States. He was replaced by company Vice President Hector Ciavaldini, a close ally of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez. Chavez has said he wants to shake up Petroleos de Venezuela,  which he has called a ``state within a state'' that enjoys an extravagant ``gold-card culture.'' Since then, a total of five executives have quit. including  three vice-presidents. Antonio Marquez, communications director at Petroleos de  Venezuela, and Antonieta Mendoza de Lopez, corporate affairs coordinator, are the latest to retire, a company official told Dow Jones Newswires. Chavez has moved to reverse a company policy aimed at expanding  production, opting instead to reduce output in order to raise prices. Prices for Venezuelan oil hit a 12-year low last year but have more than doubled since February. Some industry analysts said Chavez might endanger the company's  reputation by filling key posts with people known more for their political loyalty than energy expertise. They said Ciavaldini had been promoted because of his political connections with Chavez. Ciavaldini, a trained chemical engineer with a doctorate from  the University of London, was appointed vice president of the company by Chavez in February.
19990915000000000	Venezuela Sells Government Planes to Finance Social Programs. CARACAS, September 14 (Xinhua) -- The Venezuelan government is conducting a public auction to sell 23 government planes in order to finance the country's social programs. Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez attended the opening ceremony on Tuesday and said the government could receive 24 million U.S. dollars from the sale, which is being held at the "Francisco de Miranda" Air Base. "We could spend money to build 3,000 houses and 170 kindergartens," said Chavez. The U.S. company "Phoenix Air" bought 8 planes of "Petrels de Venezuela" (PDVSA), for 4.1 million dollars to Chavez during the ceremony. Millions of Venezuelans are living at a subsistence level in society, far below a humane threshold. They need help and money, Chavez said.
19990922000800000	VENEZUELAN LEADER PLEDGES PAYMENT OF ALL DEBTS. NEW YORK _ In an effort to reassure foreign investors, Venezuela's president said Tuesday that his government would make all its debt payments while at the same time work on a market-friendly proposal that would allow it to pay off its current debt over a longer period of time. ``We will continue to service our foreign debt, but we want to reduce the profile,'' President Hugo Chavez said through a translator at a New York news conference, held in part to give him a chance to clear up misconceptions about his economic policies. His comments came as investors keep a close watch on emerging markets in Latin America. Ecuador is struggling to avoid a default on its foreign debt and Brazil is still working to come back from the devaluation of its currency in January. Venezuela's news conference was organized by J.P. Morgan Securities, which is offering the government ideas on ways to rework its debt. As the session began, Susana de la Puente, managing director for Latin American investment banking at J.P. Morgan Securities, noted that there had been ``a lot of bad press about Venezuela lately.'' Neither Chavez nor his finance minister, Jose Rojas, would give any details of what kind of debt reworking they were thinking of. But Ms. de la Puente said that if any proposal was made to revamp Venezuela's $21.1 billion in foreign debt, it would be ``market driven,'' adding that there would be no ``involuntary restructuring.'' She said it was possible to approach investors with a deal allowing Venezuela to swap current debt for new bonds. ``We are waiting for the right opportunity, a good opportunity to do it,'' Chavez said. Investor concern about the political and economic future of Venezuela has left its debt prices at levels just above those for Ecuador and Russia. The Russians have effectively defaulted, and Ecuador is scrambling to work out a debt-restructuring plan that would avoid a Brady bond default. Brady bonds, which are named for Nicholas F. Brady, a former treasury secretary, were designed as a way to repackage the billions of dollars in unpaid bank loans to many Latin American countries that they effectively defaulted on in the early 1980s. The repackaging into bonds made the old loans more attractive to investors because they could be traded easily and came with guarantees on the principal and interest of the bonds. A 30-day grace period for Ecuador to pay $96 million in interest and principal it owes on its Brady bonds ends next Tuesday, right in the middle of the International Monetary Fund's semiannual meeting. Ecuador has not yet proposed how it will rework its current Brady bonds, although there have been reports that future oil revenue may be used as collateral. Emerging-market analysts do not think debt restructuring will be easy for Ecuador. And some say it will not be able to meet the requirements of an IMF economic program, which is a prerequisite for more international aid.
19991218005700000	STORMY WEATHER IN VENEZUELA. The torrential floods and mudslides sweeping away shantytowns in Caracas this week were inevitably compared to Wednesday's overwhelming vote for a new constitution that President Hugo Chavez sold to voters as a democratic tide to obliterate Venezuela's corrupt political system. Chavez, with his mixture of democracy and demagoguery, raises crucial questions not only about the future of oil-rich Venezuela but about other corrupt and mismanaged countries in Latin America and the rest of the world. Appealing to patriotism, religious symbols, and revolutionary rhetoric, Chavez persuaded 72 percent of voters to approve his new constitution. Venezuelans assented to the radical revision of institutions Chavez calls a ``peaceful revolution'' because they were disgusted with the old order. Despite their country's oil wealth, four-fifths of Venezuelans are living in poverty. Their political parties and courts had become notoriously corrupt. The combination of poverty, egregious inequality, and a blatantly rigged system prepared the way for Chavez and his promises to sweep away all the old rotten structures. Now, with their new constitution, Venezuelans have voted for the possibility of an elected dictatorship. Chavez himself will be able to run for two six-year terms. The army will be released from civilian control and will become a base of political power, the equivalent of a ruling party. Hundreds of new judges and new court officers will be appointed. The old Senate will be eliminated. The crucial test for this new order will not be political, however, but economic. In the year since Chavez took office, there has been a massive flight of capital from Venezuela _ nearly $4 billion. This represents a telling vote of no confidence in the statist economic programs Chavez has tried to pursue with funds from rising oil prices. Chavez may be able to charm voters with his invocations of Simon Bolivar, but markets cannot be charmed by anything other than sound fiscal and monetary policies. Sooner or later, Chavez will have to do what it takes to reverse the flight of capital. In the meantime, democracy is the loser.
20000223215400000	Venezuela May Allow US Drug Flights. CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) -- Venezuela is reconsidering its refusal to grant the United States use its airspace for anti-narcotics flights, Vice President Isaias Rodriguez said Wednesday. The issue has been a source of tension between the two countries: Venzuela says the flights infringe on its sovereignty, while U.S. officials say they're needed to stem the flow of drugs from neighboring Colombia, the world's top producer of cocaine. President Hugo Chavez's critics say his stance jeopardizes good relations with the United States, which is Venezuela's No. 1 trading partner. Chavez, who took office a year ago, has forged a close ties with Cuba and has spoken of the need to reduce U.S. influence in the world. Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering asked Venezuela again last week to allow the anti-drug flights. ``We have fully agreed on the need to establish a policy of joint cooperation to confront the problem of Colombian drugs,'' Rodriguez said in an interview. He added that Venezuela was prepared to discuss the flights as long as they do not violate the country's sovereignty. He did not elaborate. The United States wants to use Venezuela's airspace for flights from three new staging centers it has set up in Ecuador and the islands of Curacao and Aruba, just off the Venezuelan coast. The centers were set up following the U.S. withdrawal from the Panama Canal Zone, which had been used for the drug flights.
20000302000000000	Venezuela Rejects U.S. Planes Fly-over. CARACAS, March 2 (Xinhua) -- Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez rejected Thursday a United States' request to permit its planes to over-fly Venezuelan airspace in the war against drug trafficking. Chavez said that his government cooperates with the U.S. authorities in their war against drug traffic. Chavez said in Uruguay, when he attended the new president of that country, Jorge Batlle swearing in, that he understands it as a limiting decision of an operation fundamentally directed against Colombia. According to the analysts, Venezuela does not want to complicate more the relations between those two countries, because it wants to be a factor of harmony instead of aggressions, direct or indirect. The United States approved Wednesday the Venezuelan war against drugs, and also that of other Latin American countries, like Colombia and Mexico.
