10000000000000000	Welsh devolution and British Parliament What is the status of British plans for re structuring the Welsh government  How is the issue of separation from British rule being treated by Welsh and British legistators.
19920205000000000	FT  05 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major underlines resistance to self-rule - Scotland and Wales. MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, yesterday underlined his determination to resist the political pressures for Scotland to leave the UK. In his first public comment since an opinion poll showed that more than 50 per cent of Scots favour independence, he maintained that both Scotland and England had benefited from the union and emphasised: 'I do not wish to see it undermined'. The prime minister also rejected a call for a Welsh parliament by Mr Ieuan Jones, the Plaid Cymru MP for Ynys Mon. Buoyant Scottish Nationalist MPs cheered Mr Andrew Welsh, (Angus East) when he envisaged a surge in support for his party in the general election. He asked the prime minister: 'Since this government has supported independence in Russia, Lithuania and other parts of the world, when the people of Scotland democratically and peacefully vote for independence, what will this government say to them?' Mr Major emphasised that the policies of the Scottish nationalists - and those of Labour and the Liberal Democrats - would undermine the relationship 'that has served us so well in the union'. He insisted: 'Devolution is not just a matter for Scotland. It is a matter for the whole of the United Kingdom.' A government spokesman made clear later that the prime minister had not intended to imply that he favoured a referendum on the issue. Mr Major also called on his critics on the opposition benches to explain how Scotland's prosperity would be assisted by having additional taxes imposed by a Scottish parliament. He told Scottish nationalists: 'You ought to put a fair proposal before the Scottish people, not the half-baked proposal you do put forward.' The prime minister reminded Welsh nationalist MPs that on an earlier occasion when there appeared to be a majority in favour of devolution a referendum had produced a contrary result. He emphasised: 'The people of Wales realised that the best interest of their country and of the United Kingdom was to sustain the present arrangements.'
19920211000000000	FT  11 FEB 92 / Merits of muddle. If political instability does affect investment planning, this could be a grim year. The 'if' is there because I do not believe that many chief executives maintain a project file marked 'pending the outcome of the election'. They will invest when they think it will be profitable to do so. The course of the economy is set. While we remain within the exchange rate mechanism and all parties swear to abide by it, a change of government is unlikely to make much difference - except to the little matter of the chief executive's net take-home pay after tax. A bagatelle. The counter-argument is that uncertainty about government policies damages confidence and therefore business prospects. If you buy this line, get your head down. An election on April 9 is unlikely to decide anything for certain. Before explaining, let me record that not everyone agrees. One distinguished psephologist privately forecasts a Conservative majority of 100. If so, goodbye British democracy; hello Japan. More seriously, some senior ministers predict a majority of about 40. If they achieve that, we may have stability, but even 40 is difficult to believe given the opinion polls and gloomy reports from the Confederation of British Industry. The polls still suggest that there will be a hung parliament. Last week's Gallup in the Daily Telegraph gave the Conservatives a five-point lead, while Sunday's NOP in the Independent put Labour four points ahead. But the Financial Times monthly average of all polls had the two larger parties neck and neck in January and so far it is the same in February. The budget might edge up the March and April scores for the Tories. That could help. Dr John Curtice of the University of Strathclyde postulates a post-spring improvement in the perceived economic outlook and a consequent Conservative lead of 2 per cent in a June contest. His arguments are set out in a paper published by Shearson Lehman. Even with regional swings favouring the government the best his model can offer is a Conservative majority of 10. This falls to - 3 if the Liberal Democrats keep only 13 seats (as against 22 won by the Alliance in 1987). Note that Dr Curtice assumes that the election will be delayed until June. It could be, but expectations for an early April ballot are now so widespread that the prime minister is just about boxed in. My guess is still that it will be a very close call, with the Tories likely to come out ahead. If they have a majority of 15 or less then just seven by-elections (the number they have lost in a row since May 1989) would wipe them out. They would be in nearly the same weak-to-unstable position as was Labour in 1974-79. The government would function but it would be obliged to tread carefully. The Ulster Unionists, who in 1977 successfully blackmailed the then Mr James Callaghan into Only politicians really believe in the beneficence of strong government granting Northern Ireland an extra five constituencies, know how to exploit such a situation. Perhaps they would try to get Stormont back, on their own terms. Enter Scotland. Some senior ministers argue that even if the Conservatives dwindle to a taxi-ful of MPs north of the border, they can still maintain Whitehall rule. They would try to run Scotland with ministers elected in English constituencies, as they do Northern Ireland and Wales. If they did they would soon learn the meaning of the word instability. Others in the government would grant full independence if a referendum demanded it. 'I would expel them,' says one minister. Yet others believe that after the election the Scottish Conservative party will become devolutionist, as it was before Mrs Thatcher turned it, and that, if re-elected, Mr John Major would then legislate for a Scottish assembly with tax-raising powers. Never mind the consequential reduction in Scottish seats - and therefore Labour MPs - in Westminster. That is a detail. The Welsh would quickly be stirred up and suddenly the three main Celtic countries would be trying for varying degrees of disentanglement from direct rule by the English. The minister who put all this in my head believes that for these reasons constitutional debates will take up most of the new government's time and energy if the Tory majority is low. In a hung parliament there would be more urgent constitutional preoccupations. Say the Tories are the largest party. Mr Major stays prime minister and presents a Queen's Speech. Mr Paddy Ashdown says his Liberal Democrats would vote against it unless it contained a promise of proportional representation and a four-year alliance. Mr Major rejects the bait. All now depends on Mr Neil Kinnock and the Ulstermen. If they both voted alongside Mr Ashdown in the 'no' lobby Mr Major would fall and the Queen could call for the Labour leader to try to form a government. Mr Ashdown might try the same deal with him, and get the same response. But then again Mr Kinnock might accept a pact on PR. Then . . . The Liberal Democrat leader has all this on his 'war games' computer. Yet the arithmetic suggests that the only sure winners are the Ulster Unionists. So I prefer to put backgammon and gin rummy on my own laptop. Either is more soothing to the mind. In any case, I would welcome a period of instability. Only politicians really believe in the beneficence of strong government. If you draw a line down the middle of a foolscap page, as Mr Major is wont to do, and write on one side the gains from strong government (with privatisation and Thatcherite trade union legislation at the top) and on the other the losses (start with the poll tax) a pattern emerges. Most of the items on the gains side merely undo what previous strong governments contributed to the list of losses - eg, nationalisation begat privatisation, laxity with the unions begat Thatcherite laws, the poll tax begat its own abolition. Curious, is it not?
19920214000000000	FT  14 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Scotch mist clouds regional policy  -The devolution dilemma facing Labour frontbenchers. THE intriguing if somewhat arcane question of the rights and powers of Scots MPs in Westminster once a legislating, tax-raising Scottish parliament is up and running is hardly likely to dominate the general election. But neither is it merely a sideshow for the Caledonian fringe. To several cynical Labour MPs - though party officials would fiercely dispute the claim  -it is the issue upon which Labour's complex, and still largely unmapped, regional policy is built. This week the so-called 'West Lothian question' elbowed its way back into the newspaper columns after Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, highlighted Mr Robin Cook's recent assertion that he could not serve as health secretary for England once Labour's Scottish parliament was set up. Yesterday the point was taken up by the prime minister in reply to a question from his back benches. Provocatively, Mr John Major suggested that Mr Cook's self-denying ordinance should apply to other Labour frontbenchers like Mr John Smith, shadow chancellor and Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and industry secretary - and even to Mr Neil Kinnock as a Welsh MP. Labour's answer to the taunt is that Mr Cook was speaking out of turn. Party officials say Mr Kinnock does not share his views and that this constitutional wrangle will be best examined when it is reached. Mr Bryan Gould, Labour's environment spokesman responsible for regional policy, bravely tried to explain the issue to Mr Brian Walden on television on Sunday. He said 'a very substantial answer' to the question lay in Labour's plan to create elected assemblies for the English regions. As these assemblies would also receive devolved powers, Mr Gould implied they would to some extent 'balance' the new political entities in Scotland and later, Wales. If this sounds somewhat vague, then that is the overriding characteristic of Labour's regional policy - and for good reason. Mr Gould's task has been to satisfy the pressure for assemblies from northern MPs, long fearful of the ability of a Scottish parliament to attract investment across the border. At the same time, he has had to calm the anxieties of Labour councillors that their powers will be eroded, while winning round the sceptics about devolution - not least Mr Kinnock. In consequence, the delicately-worded pledges in Labour's latest policy document need to be read with care. They commit the party to setting up a Scottish parliament with tax-raising powers within a year of taking office. However, on the English regions and, it appears, a Welsh assembly, Labour promises only to set up regional 'administrations' within a first term. Elected bodies, empowered and charged with a strategic role in such areas as planning and transport, would come only in a second parliament. The repeated emphasis on the slimline nature of the bodies is evidence of Labour's sensitivity to Tory charges that the assemblies represent more unnecessary, unwanted and costly bureaucracy. Labour replies that regional sentiment is growing and that the proposal meets a general desire to see power devolved from Whitehall. The assemblies will also provide a forum for planning decisions and the administration needed to link in with Brussels' soon-to-be-formed committee for the regions. Yet large questions on the exact nature and powers of the assemblies, how regional boundaries will be drawn up and how representatives will be elected remain unanswered. Some keen regionalists like Mr Richard Caborn, the MP for Sheffield Central, want the regions ready for election within the lifetime of a Labour government. Others, more dubious, hope the lack of a fully-defined blueprint means lead times can be indefinitely extended. As several delegates to Labour's local government conference in Blackpool last weekend discreetly suggested, the proposals look alarmingly like a classic example of the leadership's fondness for institutional solutions to political problems. Mr Gould insists: 'The regional assemblies will happen.' But for the moment, many Labour campaigners hope that beyond being 'a very substantial answer' to the West Lothian question, prior to the election this particular sleeping dog will be left to lie. Nervousness north of the border, Page 13
19920225000000000	FT  25 FEB 92 / Elected Welsh assembly gains favour. WALES appears to be following in the footsteps of Scotland and moving towards increased support for an elected assembly with devolved powers along the lines advocated by the Labour party. A poll commissioned by the Western Mail newspaper in conjunction with S4C, the Welsh fourth TV channel, indicated 47 per cent favoured an elected assembly with only 31 per cent against and 21 per cent dont-knows. The poll, which was conducted by NOP, found that the creation of a Scottish assembly would increase support for devolution for Wales to 61 per cent with 24 per cent against and 14 per cent don't knows. In the 1979 referendum on devolution, when the vote was four-to-one against an assembly. FT  25 FEB 92 / Scotland the grave. Scotland will devour the energies and perhaps the spirit of the next British government. This is the privately-expressed fear of many Westminster politicians, more than a handful of whom are members of Mr John Major's cabinet. I hope they are right. The United Kingdom is ill-served by the historic complacency of the English. If the Scots oblige the infuriating tribe south of the border to think afresh about how we run our polity they will benefit everyone. If they puncture the illusion of grandeur that - nearly half a century after the end of the Second World War - still haunts the English, we can only cheer. Mr Major disagrees. Like every prime minister before him, he has begun to reflect upon the historic greatness of his office. It happens to them all. Becoming the temporary tied tenant of Number 10 Downing Street is a rush of Ecstasy to the head. You are host to Gorbachev, Yeltsin, Reagan, Bush. You take your turn as chairman of the UN Security Council, the Group of 7, the EC, or appear as first among equals at meetings of heads of Commonwealth governments. This sense of being in the control room of the civilised universe is given an electric charge by the thrill of being assured that you are doing some good. For you are supported by highly competent officials. On most days, you can reasonably claim, Britain's influence in international forums is beneficial. Back on earth, the prime minister's speech in Glasgow on Saturday could be read as an intimation to the Scots that if they choose separation from the United Kingdom they will no longer be part of all this. This is to make them face up to the consequences to themselves of putting the union in jeopardy. It could, however, be interpreted as a warning that if the Scots go, so might the Welsh and Northern Irish. That would leave little England exposed as a small offshore country, deserving of relegation. The second interpretation is consonant with Mr Major's statement that the debate on Scotland's future is 'a matter that transcends the election'. A sense of playing a leading part in world affairs also explains his passionate affirmation that 'England and Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland together are far, far greater than the sum of their parts'. The same argument gives verisimilitude to the claim that Conservative support for the union is disinterested. Floating Scotland free would detach Labour's majority from Westminster, ensuring Tory rule until kingdom come. 'And yet,' said Mr Major, 'it is our party that supports the union. Not because it's always been good for us, but because it's always seemed right to us.' The Glasgow speech was not all passionate declaration. It set out lines for Conservative participation in the debate on Scotland's future. The government may be wrong about Scotland, but at last the prime minister is taking the argument seriously. Mr Major proclaimed himself The Major choice: a modified status quo or separation for Scotland a unionist because, he insists, the true choice is between a possibly modified status quo and outright separation of Scotland. He rejected a third option, devolution of powers to a Scottish parliament, as unworkable, expensive, and likely to lead to separation. Yet there is nothing in his speech that would prevent a Conservative government elected on April 9 from turning around on April 10 and accepting that devolution is on the agenda. The conventional wisdom is that it would have to do so, since on most calculations there would be a mere taxicab full of Scottish Tories left in the House. This is not so. As prime minister of a minority or low-majority government, Mr Major would have at least three choices. First, he could attempt to tough it out, and appoint English ministers to run the Scottish office, following past examples in Wales and Northern Ireland. Second, he could try to do a de Klerk and challenge the Scottish Nationalists to a referendum. If the offer was separation or nothing, the Nationalists might lose. The status quo would be maintained, give or take a few mollifying gestures in the shape of modifications to the operations of the Scottish office. His remaining option would be to accept that many Scottish Conservatives want to revert to its pre-Thatcher pro-devolution stance. If he proves happier with the first two of the above options than the third it will be because of a genuine fear of an unravelling of the United Kingdom. I believe this to be misplaced. The worst and most unlikely outcome of devolution would be the eventual choice of Baltic-style independence by all three Celtic states. That would leave England, with 83 per cent of the population of the UK, well able to struggle along in the best 54 per cent of its land area. Within the EC, there would be no frontier checks unless they were imposed by England in a fit of pique. If Treasury figures about the cost to English taxpayers of maintaining their burdensome peripheral cousins are correct, Mr Major could reduce the standard rate of income tax to below 20p at a stroke. This takes the argument to extremes. The prime minister rightly charged that Labour's proposals for devolution are financially unconvincing. There is also the thorny question of Scottish representatives at Westminster voting, or not voting, on devolved matters. It needs an answer, even if that is no more than a reduction of the number of Scottish MPs and a restructuring of the committee system. Labour squirms around this. For Mr Major to say so serves the politics of the moment, but that is all. The Tories should look for a satisfactory framework for devolution, including consequential changes at Westminster. All that is being sought is a regional assembly, or entrenched local self-government. This is something Spain knows much about and France is wrestling with. Only England, whose elective dictatorship deprives its rulers of an understanding of shared power, recoils.
19920320000000000	FT  20 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Plaid calls for Welsh self-rule within EC. PLAID Cymru, the Welsh Nationalist party, yesterday launched its manifesto, urging self-government for Wales within the European Community. The party - which has three MPs - said that as the UK became increasingly integrated into the EC it was essential that Wales should be a fully self-governing nation. Mr Dafydd Wigley, Plaid president, said full self-government was no longer a distant aim but an urgent necessity and essential for democracy. 'Massive increases' in the EC's regional and social funds must at the same time be introduced to balance the centralising role of the community and offer poorer countries like Wales the prospect of 'intermediate prosperity'. The manifesto, titled Towards 2000, says any funding from Europe must be handled within Wales by a Welsh parliament, and must be in addition to money from the UK government. Plaid's economic policy includes more help for small businesses and high-technology industry. It also calls for a 10-year plan to restore closed-down rail links and development of harbours. The party is to contest all 38 seats in Wales, though it will fight three Gwent seats - Newport East, Torfaen and Monmouth - jointly with the Green party. This alliance with the Greens was first tried in the Monmouth by-election last May. The joint candidate won 277 votes out of the 45,195 cast in a 76 per cent turnout. The manifesto has a particular emphasis on environmental issues. The party calls for recognition of the employment potential of energy conservation and the use of renewable sources. At the same time, agriculture 'must remain a bedrock industry, with a commitment to the family farm'. It claims the failure of successive Welsh secretaries to attend crucial EC meetings has meant the interests of Welsh farmers have never been properly represented. The party also calls for a 'massive drive' to improve housing conditions - with support for first-time buyers and people on low incomes - and a comprehensive act to promote the Welsh language.  ---------------------------------- Plaid Cymru 1987  ---------------------------------- Votes                123,599 % of total votes         0.4 Seats                      3 Candidates for 1992       35  ----------------------------------
19920402000000000	FT  02 APR 92 / Election 1992: Where words could fail the politicians - Wales is divided both politically and socially by its language. POLITICALLY and so-cially, Wales is a country divided by the one thing that should unite it: the Welsh language. 'The problem in Wales,' says the senior executive with a company in Newport, south Wales, 'is that the language divides us. Those who speak Welsh don't believe the rest of us, whether born or just living here, are full citizens. 'It's not like that in Scotland. Nationalism there is part of the culture. Everyone is equal. Here in Wales, because of the language, there are two peoples, two cultures. And the fanatics will burn down your cottage whether you're English or Welsh.' That feeling, widely held outside the deeply Welsh areas of Gwynedd in the north-west and neighbouring Ceredigion in the west, means that support for the nationalist cause in Wales is severely limited. The result is that support for Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party, is largely confined to those areas where Welsh is an important part of everyday life. Plaid is engaged in an unavailing and unsuccessful struggle to break out of its language ghetto. Election results substantiate this. The three seats won by Plaid Cymru in 1987 were all in Gwynedd, the one part of Wales where Welsh is the everyday language. In the three constituencies of Ynys Mon, Caernarfon and Meirionnydd Nant Conwy the nationalists gained 36.1 per cent of the votes, comfortably ahead of the Conservatives' 30.9 and Labour's 18.1 per cent. Elsewhere, the picture was very different. Throughout Wales, Plaid Cymru gained no more than 7.3 per cent of the vote, a figure which has been steadily declining since as recently as 1974, when it was 10.8 per cent. There are only two other seats in Wales where Plaid Cymru is a credible political force in vote-winning terms. At the last election the party took 23 per cent of the vote in Carmarthen, Dyfed, and 16.2 per cent in Ceredigion and North Pembroke. Both are parts of the country where the Welsh language is an integral part of the fabric of society. By contrast, in south Wales the nationalist vote diminishes to insignificance. In Monmouth the candidate won just 363 votes in 1987, 458 in next-door Newport East, 377 in Newport West and 535 in Cardiff Central. In three constituencies Plaid Cymru is so weak it is fielding a candidate jointly with the Green party. Nevertheless, in a hung parliament every vote could count. Plaid is hardly likely to throw in its lot with the Conservatives since devolution does not figure on their agenda. In any case, Plaid Cymru sees itself as a radical party, on the left of the political spectrum. The party's stance is unequivocal: it wants a parliament for Wales. Whether it would support a Labour government, or a Lab/Lib-Dem coalition that offered something less, such as an assembly with limited powers, is not clear and would be part of the horse trading that would occur. Even though there is some evidence that support for an assembly - a centrepiece of nationalist demands - is gaining ground in Wales, it is doubtful if even half the population would vote for such a body in a referendum. When the referendum was held in 1978 just 18 per cent voted for a Welsh assembly. The opposition to it then was led by Mr Neil Kinnock. Now Mr Kinnock leads a party that is promising a Welsh assembly within the lifetime of a first Labour government. While there are undoubtedly people in the Welsh Labour party who are close to the nationalist cause, there are senior figures who are appalled at the assembly commitment. They believe Labour in Wales is being swept along on the tide of Scottish nationalism. 'The Scottish Labour party has been captured by the nationalists',' one politician said. 'Their mad policies have infiltrated the Welsh party and are pushing it in a direction and at a rate that the people of Wales do not altogether want.' Conservatives are adamantly opposed to any form of devolution. Mr David Hunt, Welsh secretary, has time and again reiterated party policy that a strong Welsh Office, with a cabinet minister, produces the best results for Wales. While this view is shared by almost the whole party, slight chinks have appeared. Mr Jonathan Evans, candidate at Brecon and Radnor, has said that though he personally opposes devolution perhaps the matter should be put to the people. Most business people, a voting class closely allied with the Conservatives politically, certainly oppose devolution. They see all their links going east, to London. 'We do not fear either London or the English,' said one. 'We work very happily with them and have no desire to cut those ties.' OF THE 38 seats in Wales, 26 are being defended by Labour, six by the Conservatives and three each by the Liberal Democrats and the nationalist Plaid Cymru. The principality holds out the prospect of a number of close contests, and many seats could go one of three ways. For example, at Brecon and Radnor in mid-Wales Mr Richard Livsey for the LIberal Democrats is defending a 56-vote majority - the smallest in Britain. The Tories were second at the last election, with Labour a close third. Conwy in the north, Cardiff Central and Monmouth in the south and even Pembroke in west Wales could also go to any one of three parties.
19920404000000000	FT  04 APR 92 / Long day's journey to the right: Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, has come of age. It was not quite JFK's Camelot. But the 250-odd guests who gathered for Neil and Glenys Kinnock's 25th wedding anniversary in the Inner Temple's Parliament Chamber 10 days ago owed something to a mediaeval court. Dotted among the Parrys and Howells from Wales were a smattering of shadow Cabinet members, courtiers from the leader's Commons bunker, Mr Gavyn Davies, the City economist, the discreet presence of favoured trade unionists and, of course, familiar friends from showbiz - John Mortimer, Anthony Sher and Stephen Fry among them. At the centre of this babbling throng, the happy couple presided with magisterial self-assurance: Neil, foot-tapping to a live performance by Cleo Laine, as Glenys chatted nearby with a relative. With election day just three weeks away, the party's aim - anniversary celebrations aside - was to show the world that, mid-campaign, the Labour leader was in command, relaxed and confident. 'It don't mean a thing, if it ain't got that swing,' trilled Cleo. And, sure enough, less than a week later, the polls swung accordingly. If Labour loses the election, the Kinnocks' party will probably rank among the highest points of their lives. After 25 years of hard politics, it was a triumphant confirmation of Labour's return to its rightful place as Britain's alternative establishment and a public acknowledgement of the Kinnocks' central part in the process. No wonder then that the host's ebullient self-confidence was the overriding impression of the evening. Yet with only days to the election to go, Mr Kinnock's personality remains at the very centre of the British political plot. Is he a Moses, destined to lead the party to the promised land, but doomed never to enter it? Or might he be a bluff Prince Hal, a boisterous rabble-rouser set to be transformed, like a political Henry V, into a safe pair of hands? If there is any single quality that is repeated time and again in the reminiscences of friends and acquaintances of the man now on the doorstep of Downing Street, it is his extraordinary lack of self-doubt. Even though, on occasions, Mr Kinnock's private insecurities show through, for some onlookers it is this conviction in his own capability that is indigestibly strong meat. One Scots MP, a self-proclaimed Kinnockite, commented recently that while he applauded all his leader's achievements, he would never be able to empathise with the man himself. 'It is the 'boyo' side of him I just can't stand. He is just not my kind of person,' he commented. Much of the Conservatives' campaign has been based on the premise that the public share the same feeling. When Mr Kinnock's virtues are discussed - his persistence, his courage in tackling Militant, his achievement in bringing Labour so close to power - his Tory critics counter that swallowed principles, inverted policies and an opportunism, forged by ambition alone, render him unfit to be prime minister. Such charges, enraged Kinnock loyalists insist, are merely a distorted fiction of the tabloid press and a wilful misrepresentation of a courageous and talented man. The truth, perhaps, is more simple than both cartoon images. So entwined is the Labour leader's political journey with the party's own decade-long metamorphosis that it is hard to disentangle the two. For The Sunday Times the Kinnock story is headlined The Flight from Conviction, but it could be called The Road Back to Reality. Even before he won the leadership election almost nine years ago, Mr Kinnock is said to have confessed privately that he had some reluctance in taking up the challenge. With his ideas still half-formed, his natural rebelliousness unprepared for the straightjacket of responsibility, his immaturity often showed. 'It has always been Neil's misfortune,' as one sympathiser put it recently, 'that he has had to do his growing up in public'. So it has been with Labour. Almost from his infancy, the young Neil Kinnock's natural effervescence drew attention. Born 50 years ago into a mining family in Tredegar - the constituency of the Labour hero, Aneurin Bevan - he was the only child of a happy marriage between Gordon Kinnock, a gently-mannered miner, and Mary Parry, a formidable and intelligent district nurse. Nurtured by devoted parents in the extended family of a Welsh mining community - the Coldstream Guards of the Labour movement - the young Neil was swaddled in security, a cheerful boy, with a cheeky talent for mimicry. Though the family was not well off, Nurse Kinnock's maternal ambitions and critical tongue saw her son hurdle the greatest obstacle to working-class success, the 11-plus exam. In consequence, and much to his irritation, he was sent to Lewis School, Pengam - a single-sex establishment considered the Eton of the Valleys. In his campaign plane last week, Mr Kinnock recalled his and his friends' loathing for the place. 'We didn't do a stroke,' he said, with mild amusement. 'But because we had got through the 11-plus we were all convinced we had made it.' Already politics, thick in the Welsh air, had permeated his life. He first saw Bevan speak aged 10, read his treatise, In Place of Fear, at 14 and joined the Labour party a year later. Unhappiness at school and three 'O' levels persuaded him to seek work in the pits, but his mother would not have it. He went on to pass well in three 'A' Levels to become the first in 'a thousand generations of Kinnocks' to take a place at university. Much scorn has been poured on Mr Kinnock's pass degree at Cardiff but his lack of academic distinction owed mostly to the heady atmosphere of university life - an exuberant combination of rugby, politics and socialising. It was here that he first met his wife-to-be while handing out leaflets in a cafeteria queue. It was to impress 'Glen' that the young tyro first took to the rostrum in speeches to up to 700 fellow students. Lord Callaghan, then a Cardiff MP, was just one of many listeners astonished by the impact of the young debater. Other Kinnockian qualities also emerged at this time, not least a certain vanity and priggishness. He was fiercely conservative in his clothes - white shirts and highly polished shoes - and curiously illiberal for the permissive 1960s. His friend Mr Rhodri Morgan, now MP for Callaghan's seat, remembers how Neil pressed the landlord of The Old Arcade pub to eject the local hippies, suspecting they were selling dope. Although a left-winger, Mr Kinnock also kept within reach of the mainstream. One of his first political collaborations with Glenys was to organise the ousting of an extreme left clique from the leadership of the Labour club. From the presidency of the Cardiff students' union on, the young Kinnock maximised his contacts in the unions and industry by lecturing for the Workers' Educational Association. A fierce opponent of Barbara Castle's In Place of Strife union reform proposals, he entered parliament in 1970 as the Heath government began its own wrestling match with organised labour. Aged just 28, the MP for Bedwellty's politics fused the lessons of his half-digested industrial relations course and the more fashionable verities of the National Union of Students. But his passion was rooted in the class solidarity that permeated the mines and factories of the Valleys. Rapidly establishing a reputation as a powerful, fluent (if verbose) speaker, the young firebrand was soon making frequent visits to constituency parties across the country. On most issues, he sat comfortably with left-wing orthodoxy, though, even then, his arguments were often based not on ideology but in practical or party political terms. On the European Community, for example, Mr Kinnock's opposition to British membership was less that the EC was a 'capitalist club' and more that the hated Tories' favoured it. On devolution for Scotland and Wales, however, he took a more marxist stance, arguing at the risk of hostility from his constituents that the working-class gained nothing from a Welsh assembly. 'We have not,' he ironically told the 1976 party conference, 'had one riot in Ebbw Vale for lack of direct elections to the Welsh Tourist Board.' A year earlier during the sterling crisis of 1975, Mr Kinnock had sided dogmatically with the left, joining 37 Labour rebels to vote down the Wilson government's package of public expenditure cuts. The minutes of Bedwellty party record that their MP argued 'it was not the task of Labour to salvage and re-establish capitalism'. When a year later his early mentor, Mr Callaghan, complimented his powerful speaking abilities by offering him a junior ministerial post, he turned it down, calculating that the price of silence, under the convention of collective responsibility, was not worth paying. So far, so radical. But in the wake of the 1979 election defeat, amid the devastation of the Winter of Discontent, Mr Kinnock's change began. Well before Labour's civil war began in earnest, the young MP had naturally sided with the grassroots activists. As early as 1973 he had helped found the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy, later to become the banner of the Bennite opposition against the parliamentary establishment. Furthermore, he had publicly opposed the 5 per cent pay norm that had triggered the conflict with the unions. Yet when parliament returned, the rebel decided to use the period in opposition to climb. Just as Mr Tony Benn decided not to stand in the shadow cabinet elections in order to fight for internal changes in the party, Mr Kinnock opted to try, arguing instead: 'It was put up or shut up time.' In interviews since he has suggested that his motive was intended to push for a left-wing programme from the vanguard not to carp from backbenches. 'It was no good wingeing on . . . it was time to influence affairs.' That appears to be borne out by his statement at the time that priva tised industries should be renationalised without compensation to shareholders. But to his allies on the hard left, Mr Kinnock's decision to accept an appointed frontbench post as education spokesman had, as Mr Benn records in his diaries, 'totally' undermined the left's argument for democratic change. But the key break did not come until the following year when Mr Benn launched his 1980 challenge to Mr Denis Healey for the deputy leadership. In an outspoken article for the Tribune newspaper, Mr Kinnock went on the offensive. Accusing the Benn manifesto's pledge of full employment within a lifetime of a parliament as 'a reckless simplicity', he said the darling of the radicals has 'significantly harmed the current standing and electoral opportunities of the Labour party'. It was the first important act of genuine political courage of his career. It signalled the end of Mr Kinnock's period of posturing and a new seriousness that was to put electoral considerations repeatedly ahead of ideology on his list of political priorities. Even before his election to the party leadership Kinnock had recognised that the growth of the Social Democratic party, demanded urgent action. He was shifting ground on Europe, believing withdrawal from the community was now no more than a fantasy. And a mounting suspicion of middle-class elitism within the Bennite-left began to colour his criticism. 'They are willing to condemn millions of people to unemployment, bad housing, deficiencies in education, bad health provision,' he wrote in a vituperative article in the Morning Star, 'they surrender the right to call themselves socialists since they are ready to fight to the last drop of someone else's blood.' Such sentiments added both to Mr Kinnock's enemies and his growing authority as a left-wing voice of reason. Furthermore, the shift in tone was as perfectly timed as the delivery of his speeches. When the Foot leadership collapsed in the ashes of the 1983 election defeat, the party judged that it was only the 41-year-old Mr Kinnock who could heal the left-right schism. In his acceptance speech, the young leader quoted extensively from Bevan's admonition against politicians speaking in 'old false categories . . . that echo the past', urging them instead to 'speak with the authentic accents of those who elected them'. Mr Kinnock added: 'We have to commend the common sense of socialism, the realism of socialism . . . the most rational, reasonable, emancipating creed ever put on the agenda of mankind.' Armed with those words, his leadership has marched steadily down the revisionist path. But while the red rose revamp of the party's image proceeded, progress was at first little more than decorative. It was his attack on the Militant tendency at the 1985 Bournemouth conference that finally underlined the deadly seriousness of Mr Kinnock's determination to see Labour back in office. But it was only in the wake of the 1987 election defeat, that his zeal spread across the party clearing the path for the root and branch policy review that eventually jettisoned unilateralism, embraced Europe wholeheartedly and reclothed Labour in social democratic colours. For Mr Kinnock himself the process of change has often been painful. Friends have noted that his natural cheerfulness has diminished. Colleagues remark sympathetically on the loneliness of a job which has seen him transformed from a darling of the media to its prime target. Ms Clare Short, a member of labour's National Executive Committee who has twice resigned from his front-bench team, still expresses a motherly affection for him. Yet the more rabid Tory tabloids aside, how unfair has the press really been? Has Mr Kinnock not taken U-turns on almost all the key issues of the day - Europe, nuclear weapons, devolution - to name but three? The truth is that in reforming the party Mr Kinnock reformed his own ideas too, turning cautious pragmatism into his new ideology. As policy-changes have seen Labour rise in the opinion polls from the 27 points of 1983 to the potentially election-winning 40s, the leader feels vindicated in his belief that the party's policies are ideologically sound - socialist even - if they fairly reflect ordinary people's beliefs and ideas. On that ground alone, unilateralism could be jettisoned - a decision that is said by intimates to have caused neither Neil nor Glenys any profound pain. The same argument underpins his lack of interest in electoral and constitutional reform. Privately, Mr Kinnock retains a deep scepticism about devolution, though he will go along with it in order to halt a Scots rebellion. On such issues as devaluation and budgetary prudence, he is dogmatically austere - convinced that quick fixes for the economy are no substitute for old-fashioned hard graft. Indeed, he is now a genuinely enthusiastic European, admiring its commitment to industry and training. The Exchange Rate Mechanism and the Maastricht convergence terms for a single currency, he believes, will prove useful shields against an explosion of unrealistic pay claims from the unions. When attacked for these policy shifts, Mr Kinnock says that his changes reflect a changed world, but retain in their ideals of redistribution and social welfare a clear continuity with Bevanite ideas. His goals, set out in his 1991 Brighton conference speech, were to enable people to get the best out of life and control their own destinies. By contrast, 'British Toryism is above all about letting the future look after itself, about letting people fend for themselves whether they are able or not.' Where then does all this leave his fitness to govern? To this, Mr Kinnock's understandable response is to point to his success in remodelling Labour into the most unified and disciplined shape ever achieved in its long history. His campaign has shown him better able than ever before at handling the rigours of the television interview and publicly sifting the minutiae of policy. Yet it is Mr Kinnock's personality that continues to provoke unease. His Tuscan holidays, his obvious delight in theatre and music, his fondness for the well-chosen word show an unashamed pride in middle-class tastes. But now and then there comes a shock. It may be the flash of temper that recently ruined a Commons' speech when he called a respected backbencher 'a jerk'. Perhaps, most of all, it is that demagogic platform style - all sweeping hand gestures and grandiose oratory - which this week dismissed Toryism, in the language of a fiery chapel preacher, as 'a sin, a sin, a sin'. The Kinnock toughness - the bullheaded stubbornness - has got him where he wants. It may well prove an asset if he is forced to bang heads round Downing Street's cabinet room table. But far from being dangerous, Mr Kinnock's politics in their mature middle-age are a reflection of the man: sturdily respectable, sentimentally embedded in community and family, romantic even, and, perhaps, a little dull. Yet, every now and then, one has the sensation that - beneath the laughter and the bonhommie - a deep hurt lingers. The champion of compassion has had to learn the ways of the streetfighter: the fare for a journey from jack-the-lad to national leader has been paid in full. Additional reporting by Emma Tucker and Catherine Milton FT  04 APR 92 / Election 1992: Whiff of success may turn out to be a lemon - Ralph Atkins and Richard Tomkins on why the Lib Dems may be winning the campaign but losing the election. DIRTY CUPS and packets of microwave curries litter the Liberal Democrats' Cowley Street headquarters. Boxes of fruit block landings in the red-brick Westminster building. Offices overflow. The party's staff and volunteers do not care. In a political tale of David versus two Goliaths, the third party's slingshot has forced Labour and the Tories to wobble. Liberal Democrats are relieved they have not been squeezed, pleased at the attention they are receiving - but, understandably, not quite sure what happens next. Mr Paddy Ashdown, the zest-filled leader is on a high, surviving on a few hours sleep and the odd cigarette snatched out of camera shot. The swing against the Conservatives and a trend towards tactical voting will almost certainly win seats but Labour may also benefit from exceptional swings in some areas. Mr Des Wilson, campaign director, has brought professionalism and pyrotechnics to campaign rallies and photo-opportunities, in contrast to the Alliance's disastrously disorganised 1987 election campaign. But there remains the air of an infant party, chuckling at its successes but unproven in high political drama of the sort that a hung parliament would create. Tensions among MPs of the last parliament over Scottish devolution and on the toughness of terms for coalition government are palpable. Less excitable insiders do not expect the party's share of the vote on Thursday to be more than a few points higher than its current 19 per cent rating in the opinion polls. Mr Ashdown openly admits he expects Labour or the Conservatives to attempt minority government. Third-party politics has always been, the art of believing the impossible and, from the campaign's outset, the party has successfully defied political gravity. Mr Ashdown knew he had to be bold, but the border is fine between bravado and recklessness. His pledge of a penny on income tax for education was vulnerable to a Conservative obsession with opposition parties' fiscal intentions. The decision to stand aside from the row over Labour's health broadcast, and a macho leader's tour taking Mr Ashdown to as many places in the time available, add to the impression of a zany strategy that, perversely, happens to work. The education promise scores highly in opinion polls. There is also popular support for higher environmental taxes and for Scottish and Welsh devolution. The small, over-stretched, campaign team, has not been plagued by the intemperate squabbles of 1987. The irrepressibly enthusiastic Mr Wilson is teased, not detested. Mr Bob Worcester, chairman of Mori, says Mr Ashdown, 'is winning the campaign, if losing the election'. That is the paradox facing the Liberal Democrats. National campaigning prowess does not automatically translate into parliamentary representation under the first-past-the-post electoral system the party is so keen to change - even in the supposed Liberal Democrat heartlands. Seats such as Portsmouth South and Hazel Grove, in Manchester, with Tory majorities of 205 and 1,840 respectively are high on the Liberal Democrats' target list. While in many other seats the Liberal Democrat will breathe heavily down the necks of Tories there are few seats where the margin is so slim. Bath (held by Mr Chris Patten, Tory chairman), Cheltenham, Richmond and Barnes, should topple easily but having been targeted for so many general elections there is a sense of incredibility in tipping Liberal Democrat wins this time. Gains are more likely in places such as North Devon, dominated by agriculture and tourism. Held until 1979 by Mr Jeremy Thorpe, former Liberal leader, a 4.1 per cent swing would oust the Conservatives. Other wins will depend on the precision with which the Labour vote is squeezed in seats where the Alliance was second in 1987, and how local factors are exploited. Take Falmouth and Camborne, in Cornwall. Superficially there is no reason to put it higher than a 'good prospect' but Cowley Street is extremely hopeful because of the local factors. Hugely popular for his maverick, pro-Cornish stance, the retiring Tory MP, Mr David Mudd, (majority 5,039) at the last election, could have been confident of retaining the seat. His replacement, the Olympic gold medallist, Sebastian Coe, is an odd choice for a county where a candidate's Cornishness matters at least as much as political affiliation. Labour and Liberal Democrats have been galvanised into a fierce fight. The Liberal Democrats start from a stronger base: they may also capture the personality vote with their Cornish candidate Mrs Terrye Jones, the articulate and well-known local council chairman. Cowley Street knows it has to fight on more than one flank. It is defending 22 constituencies and is prone to Labour's advance since 1987, which could cost seats such as Inverness, Rochdale near Manchester, Southwark and Bermondsey in London, and Liverpool Mossley Hill - all of which depend on the strength of the local candidates. Net gains in parlia-mentary strength of more than about half a dozen look improbable. So, if in the sobering light of Friday morning, neither Mr Kinnock or Mr Major are able to command a majority, Mr Ashdown's promises of how he would seek to influence the government may begin to smack of arrogance. Paradoxically, the tough terms set by Mr Ashdown could prove his saving. He knows the difficulties he will have in holding Liberal Democrats together in a coalition. The diversity of local factors which propel its MPs to Westminster, give a complex look to the parliamentary party. Pacts with Labour and the Tories are equally dangerous. Mr David Bellotti, the victor of the 1990 Eastbourne by-election, risks alienating his voters if he lets Labour in. Mr Simon Hughes, environment spokesman, has publicly expressed his scepticism over a deal with the Conservatives. The lesson of the 1977-78 Lib/Lab pact is that internal pressures could become irreconcilable but a tough position, which ruled out a deal might keep the party in one piece. In a hung parliament, minority government with the instability and indecision of which Mr Ashdown has often warned, would become reality. Electoral advance would not have won him any influence. He may have sold the electorate a lemon.
19920408000000000	FT  08 APR 92 / Election 1992: Minority parties define their terms. THE MINORITY parties yesterday joined in the pre-hung parliament manoeuvring, with both the Ulster Unionists and Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party, outlining the price for their support in such circumstances. In moves likely to add fuel to Conservative arguments that a government of any other complexion could foreshadow the end of the union, both placed devolution for their respective regions high on their shopping lists. But the Ulster Unionists hinted at emollience with a pledge not to bring down a minority government 'recklessly'. Mr James Molyneaux, UUP leader, said: 'We would not recklessly say that, unless we get our way on all things, we will bring the government down.' He predicted that another election within a month or six weeks would cause turmoil in the City. Mr Molyneaux said Unionists would vote against a Labour government if it pressed ahead with proposals for Scottish devolution without making the same provision for Ulster. He warned that there could be no surrender of sovereignty over the Maastricht treaty or greater European union, or any attempt to extend the Anglo-Irish agreement. 'We are not demanding anything - the two (main) parties are very well aware of our position,' said Mr Molyneaux. 'If they don't want to aggravate us and entice us into the opposition lobby, they will know to avoid those issues.' Mr Dafydd Wigley, Plaid president, said his party would seek a guarantee that Wales would be treated as favourably as Scotland on devolution. A comprehensive language act and a low-interest-loan fund for small businesses and farmers were among the commitments it would seek in the Queen's Speech. Also on its list were measures to help first-time homebuyers and water-bill rebates for pensioners and low-income families. The Ulster Unionist parties expect to retain all 13 of their seats in the election. Plaid Cymru had three MPs in the last parliament, who are all expected to hold their seats.
19920410000000000	FT  10 APR 92 / Election 1992: Small parties' positions in power broking. THE minority parties have been prepared to say more than either Labour or the Tories about how they might broker their support in a hung parliament. Their opening bargaining positions would be: LIBERAL DEMOCRATS: Mr Paddy Ashdown has gone further than any other party leader in setting out his terms for supporting a minority government. His essential 'pre-requisite' is a promise, in the Queen's Speech, of legislation to reform the electoral system. He is prepared to have discussions at a later stage on what form of system. Mr Ashdown has allowed himself an escape clause however. He would not necessarily vote against a minority government if Britain faced an economic or international crisis. Sharp falls in financial markets today could fall into his definition of 'crisis'. After electoral reform, Mr Ashdown has set extra spending on education, Scottish home rule and a positive European policy, including backing for a single European currency, as his priorities. Mr Ashdown does not want a repetition of the 1977-78 Lib/Lab pact. He wants a 'partnership' government in which Liberal Democrat MPs would hold ministerial posts from cabinet rank downwards. He has not said how many posts he wants or who might fill what slots. He will not support any government relying on the support of Northern Ireland's unionist politicians. ULSTER UNIONISTS: Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionist party, has indicated that he would not be looking for government posts in return for his party's support. He would support a government on an ad-hoc basis, probably requiring a drip-feed of concessions. In theory the party could support either Labour or the Tories, but Ulster Unionists are more conservative by inclination. Unionists set the repeal of the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement as their top priority, but they know that would be politically difficult for either Labour or the Tories and would require negotiations with the Irish government. They might settle for a reaffirmation of the government's determination to find a more acceptable alternative. Other demands would centre on tougher security in Northern Ireland, moves towards a devolved administration in and the reform of procedures at Westminster for Ulster business. DEMOCRATIC UNIONISTS: The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist party, will act in consultation with Mr Molyneaux. His demands would be little different, except to perhaps put more emphasis on a return to a devolved legislative assembly in Ulster, akin to the Stormont parliament which collapsed in the early 1970s. SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC AND LABOUR PARTY: The nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party, lead by Mr John Hume, is unlikely to enter a formal pact, but would support Labour - its sister socialist party - in most circumstances. If Labour was relying on unionist support they would almost certainly withdraw their support. SCOTTISH NATIONALISTS: The SNP has a long standing policy of refusing to make deals with the Tories. It also has a dislike and distrust of Labour. But it might support Labour in order to prevent a Conservative government - particularly as the Labour party proposes Scottish devolution, which the SNP could justify as a step towards independence. PLAID CYMRU: The Welsh nationalist party is highly unlikely to make any deal with the Tories and says it will not support any government without a promise of a Welsh parliament within a year. It may also see tactical advantages of keeping Labour in office. FT  10 APR 92 / Election 1992: Plaid Cymru set to hold seats. PLAID CYMRU, the Welsh nationalist party, was last night poised to hold its three seats in its north-west stronghold but to add no others. The party would not enter into political deals in the event of a hung parliament, said Mr Dafydd Wigley, its president. He said: 'There is no question of Plaid Cymru entering into a coalition. Our MPs would keep their hands free to consider every issue in the House of Commons. 'We will consider the proposals in the first Queen's Speech in the light of the policies in our manifesto.' The party's policies are closest to those of Labour. The Welsh nationalists would probably be willing to provide ad hoc support to a Labour minority government, but without the sort of unconditional guarantees required for stable rule. Labour has promised a Welsh assembly within the lifetime of a par-liament. Plaid Cymru has said it would seek a guarantee that Wales would be treated as favourably as Scotland on devolution. It also wants any Welsh parliament, which it says should be set up within a year, to have revenue-raising powers. Other commitments required might include a comprehensive language act and a low-interest loan fund for farmers.
19920411000000000	FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Labour retains Welsh heartland. THE TORY dream of chal-lenging Labour superiority in its south Wales heartland lay in tatters yesterday - while Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party, was celebrating the fact that it now has more MPs than the higher-profile Scottish National party. From a record 14 of the principality's 38 seats in 1983, the Tories dropped to six in 1987, a figure they could not improve on yesterday. 'A mixed bag,' Mr David Hunt, Welsh secretary, called the results. The six included retaking three by-election losses - Monmouth and the Vale of Glamorgan from Labour and Brecon and Radnor from the Liberal Democrats. The Tories lost Delyn, Pembroke and Cardiff Central to Labour. The Brecon result, an-nounced just after lunch yesterday after a recount, means that for the second election running Wales has the seat with the smallest majority in Britain. Five years ago Mr Richard Livsey held the seat by 56. Now Mr Walter Sweeney has a majority of 17. If the Conservative dream has been badly dented Plaid has every reason to be pleased. Although a minuscule force in terms of votes cast, the party increased its number of seats from three to four by capturing Ceredigion and Pembroke North from the Liberal Democrats and ran Labour a very close second in Carmarthen. Mr Dafydd Williams, Plaid secretary, said the party had 'now come out of its Gwynedd fortress'. Plaid's three seats in the last parliament had all been won in the one Welsh county where Welsh is very much the medium of conversation. Mr Dafydd Wigley, the party leader and MP for Caernarfon, pointed out that Plaid still had to win substantial votes in the industrial valleys of south Wales. Here its share of the vote was very small: 1,659 in Gower, 1,606 in Mr Neil Kinnock's Islwyn, 716 in Newport East and 653 in Newport West. With the Liberal Democrats losing two of their three seats, Wales remains what it has been since the early 1920s - Labour territory. Labour made a net gain of one seat, taking its total to 27 out of the 38 available. Labour polled well in Wales and pushed up its majorities handsomely. Mr Alun Michael, returned for Cardiff South and Penarth, and more than doubling his majority, said: 'We have come out of the election with increased authority. The result nationally was disappointing but we can be satisfied with that in Wales.' The question of devolution was never a real issue but whether it will recede from the voters' minds is another matter. Mr Michael said there was 'a consensus among all parties of a need for change'. Welsh secretary Mr David Hunt would not necessarily agree with him.
19920916000000000	FT  16 SEP 92 / Survey of Wales (11): Reform plans are well-advanced - The changing shape of local government. TOMORROW MORNING, councillors and officials representing the district and country councils in Wales sit down in London with Mr David Hunt, the Welsh secretary, to discuss the future shape of local government in the country for the last time before Mr Hunt produces his white paper on the subject later this autumn. It will be the councillors' final chance to influence the shape of local government in the next century. Wales is well ahead of England in this process and if the government's timetable is met the new shadow councils should be in place by May 1994, and operating from the spring of the following year. Some decisions are already known. Wales will be governed by unitary authorities. The present two-tier system of county and district councils will be replaced by single-purpose, unitary authorities. It is also clear that Mr Hunt does not intend to accede to any of the calls for an elected assembly for Wales. Other matters are, however, still to be resolved, including the number of councils. Two recent consultation papers, on education and community councils, suggest Mr Hunt has settled on 23. When he produced his first proposals for a review of local government in June 1991 he offered three options - 13, 20 or 24 unitary authorities to replace the eight existing counties and 37 districts. His preferred option was 20. By now opting for the higher end, Mr Hunt has gone a long way towards meeting the demands of the districts, who once they had seen that reform was going to be introduced, with or without their acquiescence, agreed that to argue for the protection of the present 37 councils was not a viable option. This decision, reached just over a year ago, was crucial, since it allowed the districts to outflank the eight counties which, until a late stage, continued to press for their existing number and their members to be the basis of reform. Not that the districts willingly, at first, agreed to ditching any of their members. It was only after a lot of banging of heads, and then reluctantly, that the districts agreed some should go to the wall. Eventually, the Council of Welsh Districts suggested between 25 and 30 with a preferred option of 27. 'The key to the whole reform must be to relate local activities to the people,' say Mr Geraint Price-Thomas, under secretary (Wales) of the Association of District Councils. 'This means making them acceptable to the people.' The counties do not disagree. Mr Hugh Thomas, secretary of the Assembly of Welsh Counties and chief executive of Mid Glamorgan County Council, says: 'We are concerned at delivering a service to the community that should be efficient and cost effective.' After their initial exercise in digging in heels by advocating their number  -eight - should be retained the counties have shifted, rather late in the day, to suggesting there should be 16. The eight chief executives have, however, been sufficiently concerned at the way the whole issue of reform has been going to publish a paper expressing, independently of the elected members, their own deep concern. 'The case for change must rest on whether any proposed change will secure sufficiently worthwhile improvements,' they say. In a strongly worded attack, they complain that 'the proposals emerging indicate a lack of integrated consideration of local government's purpose, functions, financing, internal management and structure. Democratic accountability will be undermined, be administratively unwieldy and be less understood by local people than at present.' They conclude that if the concept of unitary authority is to be implemented in accordance with the government's principles - democratic accountability; responsive to local needs; clearly understood; strengthened community loyalties; efficient services - the solution lies with larger unitary authorities than Mr Hunt has proposed. This might seem like special pleading from a body of men and women that stand to lose most by the proposed reforms - except that it has been backed by the business community. The Confederation of British Industry has expressed 'serious misgivings' about the proposal to have over 20 councils. Accepting the government's position that reform should be cost-neutral the CBI claims the handling of strategic issues could be fragmented if the number of authorities were to be too large and that the small Welsh authorities 'may also be at a disadvantage compared to the English counties.' The calls for an elected assembly come mainly from Labour, the dominant political force in Wales. It controls 27 of the country's 38 parliamentary seats. It also controls five of the eight counties and 18 of the 37 districts. Not that a unified approach would be easy, anyway, since it is the policy of Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalists, to bypass an assembly and go directly for an independent Wales within the European community. Since the nationalists are a minority force in their own country, despite winning a fourth seat at last April's general election, polling slightly under 10 per cent of the popular vote and trailing not just Labour and the Conservatives but also the Liberal Democrats, this policy is as much dead in the water at the moment as an elected assembly. That leaves Mr Hunt, born in Wales but brought up in Liverpool and representing an English constituency, calling all the shots despite having just six Conservative seats in the principality. Mr Hunt smiles a lot and gets on well with his political opponents. But behind the bonhomie is a steely resolve. He will get what he wants for Wales, which is why this autumn's white paper is awaited so keenly.
19930305000000000	FT  05 MAR 93 / A vote could set them free. Britain's political logjam could be broken by a well-tested explosive force  -the referendum. Both sides could use it. The prime minister could blast away the gridlock in the Conservative party by promising its anti-Maastricht rebels a plebiscite when (if?) the government decides to exchange sterling for a European currency. The leader of the opposition could unite the Labour party around his campaign for 'a citizens' democracy' by undertaking to consult the people on proportional representation. There is one small snag. Both Johns - Major and Smith - are against referenda. They regard the device as unconstitutional, an affront to the sovereignty of parliament. This objection is specious. Plebiscites have two functions. First, they express the popular will. Important constitutional changes should be endorsed by direct vote. Second, they rescue politicians in trouble. This is not a wholly ignoble cause. They are all rascals, but they are our rascals. From time to time they have to be extricated from the consequences of their own follies. The 1975 referendum on Britain's membership of what was then called the Common Market fulfilled both functions. It saved the Labour government, and it legitimised Britain's membership of the EC. The 1979 referenda on the devolution of parliamentary powers to Scotland and Wales, also called by Labour, was a party fix. Scotland voted yes, but not by a large enough majority to overcome obstacles devised by parliamentary opponents of devolution. A party fix would do nicely for the Tories right now. The parliamentary battle over the bill to ratify the Maastricht treaty is blocking normal government business. The Conservatives are at war with themselves. A quarter of their normally loyal backbenchers have voted against the bill, or abstained. The cabinet is sorely divided; one minister confessed the other day that he had contemplated resignation over Maastricht 'many times'. An unwritten, perhaps unspoken, deal has been struck. Europhobe ministers will stand by Mr Major and support his bill. The headline scares of last weekend are groundless. Messrs Howard, Portillo and Lilley are not plotting a Thatcherite coup. In return, the prime minister will cast aside thoughts of rejoining the exchange rate mechanism before the next general election. That comforts the sceptics, who believe that the ERM will collapse. Some of them assume that full monetary union will not be possible in their lifetimes. A promise of a plebiscite on British participation in a single currency union would add extra assurance. It would cost Mr Major nothing: he cannot bind future parliaments. He would have to eat some past words, but that is a price he may have to accept, if he finds himself with his back against the wall with the rebels' spears at his throat. Meanwhile he lives in hopes. He is relying on signs of the end of recession, plus rousing speeches such as the one he is due to make at a party conclave in Harrogate tomorrow, to see him through. He may escape the humiliation of being forced to concede a referendum, but he cannot bank on it. He is living from day to day. The Labour leader is playing a longer game. His party's commission on electoral reform is expected to report next month. Whether or not it comes out firmly in favour of PR for elections to the Commons Mr Smith will have to take a view. The one most likely to keep his party united would be an indication of his personal preference, plus a promise of a referendum. If he follows the logic of his own recent strong speech on constitutional reform his leaning should be towards PR. Let us ignore for just a moment the usual crass calculations about what this would do for relations with the Liberal Democrats. A referendum on the method of election is justifiable on its own merits. Voters everywhere are becoming disillusioned with politicians. Electorates that have been consulted show that they are keenly aware of the merits of competing systems. The Italians, who have too long endured an unwieldy list mechanism may yet discover that the people are better judges of what is in their own interests than are the parties. In Ireland, for example, Fianna Fail failed twice - in 1958 and 1968 - to end the single transferable vote method of elections to the Dail. In New Zealand the voters have spoken with dramatic force. The two main parties stumbled into last September's referendum along a trail of broken promises, slippery statements, and competitive bids for popularity. According to a paper delivered by the political scientist Richard Mulgan at the Australian National University, politicians from these parties 'confidently expected that they could draw on traditional Anglo prejudices against the immobilism and unaccountability of coalition governments and against the smoke-filled-room aroma of party lists'. They therefore loaded the dice in favour of the Westminster first-past-the-post mechanism that has long suited them so well. Voters were asked to think, first about whether they wanted a change and, subsequently, about which of four alternative systems they would prefer. On a 55 per cent turnout, 85 per cent favoured an end to first-past-the-post and 70 per cent chose the German model, with its mixture of constituency and list MPs. This from New Zealand, which harbours a closer replica of English society than any other on earth. Before he talks of a referendum, Mr Smith needs to think. A clumsy introduction of PR into the fag-end of last April's election campaign appears to have cost Labour dearly. A careless commitment to a plebiscite in the next Labour manifesto would leave several questions unanswered, not least about why Mr Smith favoured a change (if he did) while his deputy, Mrs Margaret Beckett, opposed one (which she almost certainly would). Those who still dream of Labour ruling on its own would be set against those who believe that it stands a chance only in coalitions. The Labour leader would have to come off his personal fence, even if he allowed his immediate colleagues to campaign against one another, as they did in 1975. Will it happen? Picture Mr Smith striding out in front of his party the better to lead it. I don't believe it either, but it would be explosive.
19930820000000000	FT  20 AUG 93 / Call to scrap council reform. THE GOVERNMENT's plans for reorganising local government in Wales and Scotland should be withdrawn, leaders of the Assembly of Welsh Counties and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said yesterday. In a joint declaration after a meeting in Cardiff they described the proposals as 'a serious threat to local democracy, to the delivery of services and to the social and economic well-being of communities'. They called on the government to set up independent commissions to recommend the structure and organisation of local government that would best deliver services. The government has published white papers for local government reform in Wales and Scotland. In Wales the existing eight county and 37 district councils would be replaced by 21 unitary authorities. Scotland's three island, nine regional and 53 district councils would be replaced by 28 single-tier councils. The Welsh and Scottish associations said: 'The process of transition is certain to be costly and hinder the development of policies on community care, on protection of the environment and on the encouragement of investment.' The associations said they would not co-operate with the government over its proposals, and reorganisation should not be considered until it had agreed to create a directly elected Welsh assembly and Scottish parliament. In contrast to the Assembly of Welsh Counties, the Council of Welsh Districts wants the government to press ahead with the reforms.
19931030000000000	FT  30 OCT 93 / Plaid in PR bid to lift number of female MPs. HALF THE MPs in a future Welsh parliament must be women, Mr Dafydd Wigley, the Plaid Cymru president, said yesterday. The Welsh Nationalist leader said that an incoming Labour government or a Liberal Democrat/Labour pact should use a voting system based on proportional representation to ensure 'near parity' between men and women members. It is expected that a Welsh parliament would be set up in the first year of an incoming Labour or Liberal Democrat/Labour government. Plaid Cymru, debating the issue at its annual conference in Cardiff, is pressing for a chamber made up of two MPs - one man and one woman - from each of the 38 constituencies in Wales, plus additional elected members, to give a total of about 100 members. In his address to the conference - which earlier this week launched a campaign to put independence back on the political agenda - Mr Wigley, MP for Caernarvon, gave his support to proposals for a two-stage drive towards self-government for Wales. On the last day of the three-day conference today delegates will debate calls for a Welsh parliament with law-making and financial powers to take over responsibility for all functions which are currently undertaken by the Welsh Office and about 80 quangos - such as the Welsh Development Agency. The second more controversial step, setting up a fully self-governing Welsh republican state in Europe, would be put to Welsh voters five years later.
19931119000000000	FT  19 NOV 93 / The Queen's Speech: New councils by 1995 - Wales. THE GOVERNMENT is pressing ahead with plans to reform the structure of local government in Wales by holding shadow elections to new unitary authorities as early as next year. It intends that these councils should take over in April 1995. The bill announced in the Queen's Speech is expected to follow closely proposals in a Welsh Office white paper last March. This described plans to replace the existing eight county councils and 37 district councils with 21 unitary authorities. The white paper followed more than 18 months of consultation which found support for the principle of unitary authorities, although the county councils and Labour party argue there should be no re-organisation without first creating an elected Welsh assembly. The government rejects this. Mr Russell Goodway, chairman of the Assembly of Welsh Counties, said yesterday that without such an assembly the current system should remain. 'A very expensive reorganisation will not result in a better system and improved services.' The district councils, however, are broadly in favour. Mr Tom Williams, chairman of the Council of Welsh Districts, said: 'A new structure of at least 21 unitary authorities will lead to a renewal of local democracy at considerably less cost than at present. Such a structure will save at least Pounds 100m over the next 10 years.' Mr Harry Jones, leader of the CWD's Labour group, said: 'We will be monitoring the bill closely with a view to opposing, when necessary, those proposals which might undermine the independence of local government.' About 150,000 people work for Welsh councils and the biggest part of the transitional costs will be redundancy payments. The white paper made no estimate of the likely level of redundancies.
19931123000000000	FT  23 NOV 93 / Welsh council reform to be delayed a year. The government will delay the implementation of local government reform in Wales for a year in what could be an embarrassment for Mr John Redwood, the Welsh secretary. Mr Redwood had intended to make a statement confirming the decision last night, at the end of the Queen's Speech debate in the Commons on local government reform. However, protesting Liberal Democrat MPs prevented him from delivering most of his speech as they forced a technical vote which used up the time he needed at the end of the third day's debate on the Queen's Speech. Mr Redwood said he was 'appalled by the unnecessary division'. The delay in implementing the measures, which will create unitary local authorities in Wales and Scotland, has been caused by pressures on the parliamentary timetable for legislation. The government originally proposed that its bill to reform local authorities should become law in the spring, to be followed by elections to the new shadow councils in Wales next June. But although the bill will be introduced in the House of Lords as early as next week, it is unlikely to be debated by the Commons before next February  -leaving political parties with too little time to campaign for Welsh elections in the summer. Ministers expect the legislation to be enacted in the current session. But government officials said yesterday the Welsh polls would probably take place in 1995, with officers taking up their posts in 1996. Speculation over the postponement dominated yesterday's Commons debate on local government. The government plans to set up 21 new authorities to replace eight counties and 37 districts in Wales. In Scotland, ministers are planning 25 councils, replacing nine regions and 53 districts. Introducing the debate, Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, said a single-tier system would reduce the public's confusion over the services that were provided by particular authorities. However Mr George Robertson, in his first Commons appearance as shadow Scottish secretary, accused the government of indulging in a 'gerrymandering extravaganza' in the way it had drawn boundaries for the new authorities. The Council of Welsh Districts, which has broadly welcomed the reform proposals, said last night that it was disappointed by the postponement.
19940716000000000	FT  16 JUL 94 / Blair targets Lords in pledge on reforms. Mr Tony Blair, the runaway favourite to succeed the late John Smith as Labour leader, committed the party yesterday to a sweeping constitutional shake-up, including parliamentary reform, devolution and human rights legislation. In the last of six speeches aimed at the 4.5m voters in the leadership election, Mr Blair promised 'a new constitutional settlement' in the first term of a Labour government. He also wanted to see the abolition of the right of hereditary peers to sit in parliament. He sought to exploit continuing concerns about the probity of the Conservative government by pledging that he would insist on 'the highest standards' of honesty and integrity from ministers and party officials. Mr Blair's comments reflect confidence among his advisers that he will win by a substantial margin when the results are announced at a special conference in London on Thursday. Friends say that Mr Blair has already begun to think about changes to the opposition front bench team, although he has decided to delay a shake-up until the autumn. Mr John Prescott, the shadow employment secretary, is increasingly confident of victory in the race for the deputy leadership, which is also being contested by Mrs Margaret Beckett. Mrs Beckett, who was Mr Smith's deputy from 1992 until his death in May, told the Financial Times in an interview that it was 'perfectly possible' she might fail to win either of the leadership posts. 'I am used to going into elections that I might not win, and having to make my case and abide by the judgment of the electorate,' she said. Mr Blair said in Cardiff that government under both parties had become centralised, bureaucratic and indifferent to the fundamental rights of citizens. He also sought to raise public concern about the impact of quangos (quasi autonomous non-governmental organisations) by linking constitutional issues directly to economic prosperity. 'People care that vast amounts of their money are being swallowed up by quangos, to be spent on projects they know nothing about, by Tories they have never voted for,' he said. Mr Blair wants a long list of constitutional changes, including devolution for Scotland, Wales and the English regions; greater powers for local government; incorporation into domestic law of the European Convention on Human Rights; and a Freedom of Information Act. Straight talker, Page 6
19940722000000000	FT  22 JUL 94 / Hanley condemns Blair for being 'all style, no substance'. Mr Jeremy Hanley, the Conservative party's new chairman, was quick to describe Mr Blair yesterday as 'all style and no substance'. Mr Hanley said in a robust attack that the new Labour leader had been elected 'for his looks, not for his policies' and that he had 'failed to produce any positive reasons for voting Labour'. He added: 'Wherever he goes, he will not make progress weighed down with the baggage of Labour's out-of-date and unwanted policies. Whoever is their leader, Labour is the traditional party of high taxation.' Some Tory backbenchers frankly admitted that Mr Blair would pose a substantial new threat to them. One said: 'He is an effective communicator whom we will have to watch very carefully.' But another backbencher suggested that Mr John Prescott might have made a more effective leader, appealing more directly to Labour's core voters. 'I have sat next to Prescott on Commons committees and he is very effective indeed,' he said. The Liberal Democrats were generous in their response. Mr Malcolm Bruce, the party's new Treasury spokesman, said he welcomed Mr Blair because 'Britain desperately needs good leadership'. But he added: 'There is much work to be done before Labour can claim to be a modern political party. There is no point in having an economic programme unless it is clearly costed.' Mr Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National Party, said that Mr Blair had ignored Scotland in his acceptance speech. Referring to what he called Labour's 'commitment' to set up a Scottish parliament, Mr Salmond said: 'It would seem extraordinary, if devolution is to be an important plank in his policy programme, that our entire nation should be omitted from such a comprehensive address.' Commenting in similar vein, Mr Dafydd Wigley, president of Plaid Cymru, complained that Mr Blair's omission of any commitment to self-government showed Labour was 'turning away from Wales and Scotland in a bid to win votes in the south-east of England'.
19940730000000000	FT  30 JUL 94 / England: the west's one-party state: Over the last century the Tories have ruled Britain longer than the Communists ruled Russia. Andrew Adonis explains how they did it. It will be interesting to be the last of the Conservatives. I foresee that will be our fate. Such was the private prediction of Britain's longest-serving, and arguably most successful, Conservative leader of the past century. It was not Margaret Thatcher but the Marquess of Salisbury, prime minister for 13 years at the zenith of Victorian Britain's imperial power between 1885 and 1902. No modern Tory leader, least of all Baroness Thatcher, would express such forebodings, even in private. Not in their gloomiest moods contemplating opposition to a Blair Labour government do Tories fear for the annihilation of their party. The 'Canadian scenario' - the ruling Conservatives were reduced to just two seats in last year's Canadian general election - is nothing but a party game in Britain (name the two Tory MPs you would like to see survive). The reason for this goes to the heart of contemporary English culture and politics. Since Lord Salisbury's day the Tories have, above all, been the voice of the English middle class. As that class has grown, and its values and aspirations permeated English society at large, the strength and inner self-confidence of the Tories has increased. Not that the Tories were previously weak. The Conservative party is the oldest and most successful political party in any western democracy. It has governed Britain for 76 of the 110 years since the creation of the mass electorate in 1884 - longer than the Communists ruled Russia, but with the inconvenience of 29 free elections in between. Why, then, do the Tories appear so adrift? John Major's failings and survival prospects have preoccupied the Westminster world since the day he succeeded Thatcher - a grey man leading a grey cabinet, dominated by uninspiring political managers whose driving ambition is to stay in office. Some believe that the Tory malaise goes far deeper. In a recent pamphlet, John Gray, the political philosopher, argues that British Conservatism has committed suicide on the altar of free market economics. 'Traditional conservatism no longer exists in Britain,' he claims. 'It is dead - killed off by the radical market liberalism which the Tories adopted in the late 1970s, and which has governed the policies of successive Conservative governments since that time.' The idea is appealing. Insofar as 'Majorism' represents a programme, it is the dregs of Thatcherism - taking privatisation to lengths Thatcher dared not go (the railways and the Post Office), and advancing remorselessly with public sector reforms - notably in health and education - launched in the mid-1980s. However, Gray is on shaky ground in arguing that modern Toryism is 'thoroughly uncongenial to the tolerant and sceptical temper of the British electorate,' and that the Conservatives are bound to reap the electoral whirlwind. The likelihood of a Tory defeat is the wisdom of the political establishment, whose horizons rarely extend beyond the latest opinion poll, by-election or leadership change. But an historical perspective puts the Tories' present predicament in a different frame. In the first place, there is no such thing as the 'British electorate'. For much of the last century Scotland, Wales and (Northern) Ireland have refused to conform to the English pattern. Scotland and Wales have been markedly less Tory than England. Until the inter-war years their professional classes, never fully anglicised and more collectivist-minded, looked mainly to the Liberals for political careers. Since, the same impulses have led them to Labour. The Tories are the English National Party. 'My politics are described by one word, and that word is ENGLAND,' Disraeli told his electors in 1832. Norman Tebbit's Euro-sceptics could not put it better today. 'That word' has been nothing but a boon to the Tories. Although it rarely speaks its name, English nationalism is as potent a political force as its more naked counterparts on mainland Europe, and England accounts for four-fifths of the seats in the House of Commons. Fighting the separatist tendencies of the other parties has always been a prime source of Tory ideology and morale, from Gladstone's Irish Home Rule plans of the 1880s to successive schemes for Scottish and Welsh devolution supported by Liberals, Labour and Nationalists in recent decades. For the Conservatives it was only a short step to fighting the Brussels bureaucrats - or, at any rate, refusing to give in to them as much as the other parties. It is potentially just as popular a cause in England. Nationalism inevitably creates problems of government. Salisbury had to govern Parnell's Ireland without too much repression. John Major cannot afford total isolation in Brussels - and when Baroness Thatcher achieved that, she had to go. Yet Tories have ever been masters at tempering visceral campaign rhetoric with compromise in office. Moreover, Tory England is expanding England. The last 30 years have seen a sharp contraction in the manual working class, a population shift to the home counties, and an inexorable rise in home ownership. The 'salariat' comprised 18 per cent of the UK electorate in 1964; it now extends to about a third (more in England), with the proportion of home owners up from about one-third to two-thirds (ditto). Over the same period the 'petty bourgeoisie' of small shopkeepers and other self-employed tradespeople, consistently the most pro-Tory of social groups, has remained a solid 10 per cent of the electorate. England now has more actors than miners, and each parliamentary boundary review sees a redistribution of seats from the cities to the suburbs. The Tories have long been the party of home-owning suburbans. Lord Salisbury called it 'villa Toryism,' and favoured single-member parliamentary seats as the best means of isolating it from less reliable - but often still pro-Tory  -urban working-class districts. Most of today's English electorate are villa Tories in lifestyle and aspirations. Villa Tories do not invariably vote Tory. In mid-term local and European elections they have always been liable to defect en masse - particularly, in southern England, to the various incarnations of the Liberal party. Since the mid-1970s the Liberal Democrats, as they have become, have garnered a sizeable vote, appealing particularly to non-metropolitan manual workers and public-sector professionals anxious for more public spending. Tony Blair's Labour party will mine the same seam. It is important, however, to understand the strength of the Tory bedrock. The Conservatives have never polled less than 40 per cent of the English vote in a general election. Exclude the inner cities, and at the last election they took more than half the vote across England. Under a similar electoral system to the UK's, France's ruling Gaullists triumphed in last year's French election with the support of a mere 28 per cent of the electorate. Furthermore, the non-Tory vote is deeply divided - and divided most of all on the issue of opposing the Conservatives. Since the 1950s about half the Liberal vote has typically been second preference Tory: the rise of the Liberals in the last 20 years signifies, above all, a decline of support for Labour among the English electorate. True, Liberal MPs and activists have typically been closer to Labour than the Tories, but knowing their electorate to be more ambivalent they have been wary of saying so. Even now, with policy divisions between Liberal Democrats and Labour infinitesimally small, the two parties glare at each other across a raised drawbridge. What, then, of Gray's notion that under Thatcher the Tories converted to a radical variant of market liberalism profoundly offensive to the English middle class? The Conservatives have, in fact, long been the party of market liberalism. Back in the late 18th century William Pitt's Tory party was committed - until deflected by the wars against revolutionary France - to tax cuts and an assault on tariffs and budget deficits. The early 19th century saw a struggle between the free market and the landlord consciences of the party. It was resolved in favour of the free marketeers by Sir Robert Peel's repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. This established the Tories' commitment to minimum levels of taxation and economic intervention consistent with the winning of wars and elections, although trade protectionism continued to be an issue. Disraeli's 'one nation' rhetoric in the 1870s was a smokescreen for a social policy consisting of two essential and enduring principles: the identification of the Tories as the party of all property-owners, not just landlords; and the trumping of whichever social reforms - enacted or likely  -of the party's Labour or Liberal opponents were judged necessary for electoral success. Under Salisbury that meant upholding Gladstone's extension of the franchise. Under Stanley Baldwin, in the inter-war years, it meant accepting a social safety net. After the second world war it meant preserving the welfare state. What happened in the 1980s was not a conversion to market liberalism, but a social change within the Tory elite which strengthened its startling discovery that the party had become Britain's natural governing force. A new self-confidence, bolstered by Thatcher's leadership, led the party to espouse its market liberalism more forcefully than it had done for decades. The social transformation was dramatic. In 1939, the Tory party's 400 MPs included just 10 solicitors, eight accountants and four teachers. 'When the call came to me to form a government,' recalled Baldwin of his first government in 1923, 'one of my first thoughts was that it should be a government of which Harrow should not be ashamed.' Tory cabinets were stuffed with aristocrats and their close relations as late as Harold Macmillan's premiership in the early 1960s. Macmillan's successor was the 14th Earl of Home, and most of the old brigade survived under his successor, Edward Heath. Neither Thatcher (Grantham High) nor Major (Rutlish Grammar) were - or are - much concerned at the shame of Harrow and Eton. Under Thatcher, the sons of teachers, doctors, mainstream professionals and small tradesmen largely replaced the landowners, barristers and wealthy businessmen on the Tory benches in the House of Commons, and followed them into government. The result is a Tory elite more representative of its electorate than ever in the party's history. Major is its apotheosis. For all its new-found radicalism, the new Tory elite has been wary of reining back the public sector. Privatisation and the curbing of trade unions, policies popular or at least inoffensive to middle England, have been the most radical changes of the last decade. By contrast, spending on state benefits, education and health services has risen broadly in line with the expectations of the Tory middle classes. Kenneth Clarke (Nottingham High School, Cambridge University), the archetypal modern Tory MP, addressed four-square the question of the middle classes and public spending in a recent lecture which brilliantly exhibited the sensitivity of the modern Tory antenna. 'It is idle to think that middle England does not sometimes feel worried,' he declared. 'Providing a sense of security in an uncertain and changing world has nothing to do with feathering middle England' - which, of course, is just what middle England likes to think. Indeed, the greatest 1980s catastrophe - the poll tax - occurred because Thatcher was too mindful of the raw prejudices of middle England's home-owning ratepayers. Clarke put his finger on the nub of Tory vulnerability in the next decade - English middle-class insecurity in the face of employment uncertainties and flat or falling house prices. There is nothing new in such middle-class anguish, as a brief glance at Agatha Christie's detective novels will confirm. In the past, however, middle England looked to the Tories as a guardian from insecurity - in particular from the evils, real and imagined, of Liberal and Labour governments. Now, middle England appears to be laying the blame for its insecurity at the feet of a Tory government. Just possibly, if the angst persists, a new model Labour party renouncing redistributive socialism and led by an impeccable public schoolboy could become the repository of middle English anguish in a general election. It is a paradox that successful Conservative parties are rarely conservative in practice, since without a capacity to adapt to change they could never succeed for long in government. Their conservatism lies in their rhetoric and the emotional loyalties they inspire. For summer reading, Tony Blair could do worse than a biography and collected speeches of Lord Salisbury. This is adapted from A Conservative Revolution? The Thatcher-Reagan Decade in Perspective, edited by Andrew Adonis and Tim Hames, Manchester University Press, Pounds 35 hardback, Pounds 12.99 paperback.
19940923000000000	FT  23 SEP 94 / Breakaway Britain. The question will not go away. If Ulster is to be granted self-determination, why not Scotland? Why not Wales? Even the most recalcitrant Conservative, afraid of rationality, fearful of any dilution of the mythical powers of a long-dissolved empire, must grant that there is some anomaly here. There is an explanation, of course. Northern Ireland has been the subject of terrorist violence for 25 years, while Scotland has not. As an excuse, that awful observation is insufficient. It does not answer to the Scottish nationalists, whose 60th birthday is being celebrated at their annual convention this week. The secessionist party is riding high in the polls, its faith in the democratic process not to be doubted. The inference is unavoidable. A settlement in Ulster may be a long way off, but pulling at the Irish thread could unravel the British polity. Wait. Flash back. There on the videotape is Mr John Major, standing on his soap-box. It is April 5 1992, the Sunday before election day. The prime minister, fighting a campaign most people reckon he is about to lose, warns against proposals for a Scottish parliament, or, worse in his eyes, Scottish independence. 'If I could summon up all the authority of the office I now hold, through the ages, I would put it into this single warning,' he declaims. 'The United Kingdom is in danger. Wake up now before it is too late.' We will never know how many minds were changed by that uncharacteristically passionate moment of oratory. Perhaps millions, perhaps none. Mr Major himself is in little doubt that his Sunday speech, regarded at the time as quixotic, helped the Conservatives win their fourth consecutive spell of office. His views will certainly not have been unpopular in middle England. 'Consider the outcome - the walls of this United Kingdom that appear so strong, undermined from within,' he said. He urged voters to shy away from proportional representation, at that time proffered by the Liberal Democrats alone. In European affairs Conservatives would 'speak for Britain' while Labour and the Lib-Dems would 'act for Brussels'. Now flash forwards on your virtual reality screen. It is spring 1996 or 1997. There is Mr Major again, in mid-campaign, looking more mature, more filled-out than previously. The central issue is, as always, whether the existing set of rascals is to be trusted with management of the economy, or whether the rival gang is to be given a chance. Yet there is chatter on the periphery. Senior politicians are arguing about the future shape of the European Union, and Britain's role in continental politics. Ulster has its own parliament, in session or on the way. We can imagine what the Scottish nationalists say about that. Labour and the Lib-Dems, their campaign literature stuffed with talk of national renewal, have undertaken to renovate the constitution. High-flown talk of a 21st century settlement between the peoples and governments of these islands has become commonplace. Up springs Mr Major, onto the box. The prime minister recalls his words of four or five years previously. 'Quebec,' he says, 'Slovakia', he adds, 'and Serbia, Croatia, unspellable pieces of old Russia and what about Spain?' He speaks of the historic glories of the United Kingdom, the distinctiveness of the island nation, the enduring values enshrined in the most ancient of parliaments, the true freedom of those fortunate enough to be born British. He dresses from head to toe in the Union Jack. That, as they say in New York, could go down like chopped liver. Or perhaps not. The debate has yet to begin. The mainstream opposition parties both promise systemic reform. Labour and the Lib-Dems would give Scotland its parliament, bar hereditary peers from the House of Lords, create regional authorities in England and perhaps an assembly in Wales, enact a bill of rights, and introduce proportional representation for elections to bodies other than the House of Commons. The latter is to be decided by referendum. No one is surprised that Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Lib-Dem leader who has had an unfortunate week at his party's conference, favours such a programme. What now needs to be established is the strength of commitment of Labour's new leader, Mr Tony Blair. He must either campaign strongly on the reform theme, or quietly bury it. The latter would be difficult. One argument for devolution was set out by Mr George Robertson, Labour's shadow Scottish secretary, in a speech in Frankfurt earlier this month. It is that some give, some flexibility, and a great deal of decentralisation of power would prevent a break-up of the United Kingdom. 'Today's British government plays into the nationalist hand by a staggering lack of vision in adapting constitutionally as it has done over 150 years,' he said. There is, however, another case to put. Britain has not been well-served by the concentration of power at the centre. Since 1979 the Conservatives have behaved with the arrogance of the single party in a one-party state. They have weakened or overturned one democratic institution after another. They have neutered local government. They have appointed friends and cronies to sit on school boards, hospital managements, and at every station on the network of quangos. The Treasury controls these unelected bodies by exercising authority over their expenditure. Meanwhile Ulster, Scotland and Wales, not to mention Lib-Dem Cornwall and Devon, boast their own traditions, separate from those of England. Across the water, Europe is being reshaped. It is time to modernise the way Britain is governed. Mr Blair has shown himself to be aware of the strength of this argument, and conscious of the appeal it has in some quarters, not confined to Charter 88, the energetic pressure group. Reform was consistently cheered by the Lib-Dems this week. The Labour leader will be spared the embarrassment of negotiating a post-election arrangement with Mr Ashdown if he can steal enough of the latter's voters away. It is highly unlikely that an election will be won on the issue of constitutional reform. Against that, there is little else to enthuse opposition supporters. Labour's pronouncements on the economy too closely resemble the Conservatives' to cause the blood to rush round activist veins. If there is to be a Left vision, it has to be reform.
19941007000000000	FT  07 OCT 94 / The Labour Party in Blackpool: Policy to hold referendum on PR confirmed. Labour yesterday reaffirmed its commitment to hold a national referendum on proportional representation - in spite of fears that this could divide the party. In a wide-ranging debate on the future of the British constitution, leftwing activists argued that Labour should rescind a decision taken last year to hold a referendum, claiming that this could allow the Liberal Democrats to gain more Commons seats. Several speakers argued that a referendum on PR would distract an incoming Labour government from implementing its economic programme. Fears were also expressed that PR would allow extremist groups into parliament. However, the conference narrowly voted to stick by the resolution taken last year which accepted the Plant Commission's recommendations on electoral reform. This commits Labour to supporting the current first-past-the-post system, but concedes that the public should be allowed to express its preference for electoral reform. The conference also made clear its determination to abolish the large number of quangos set up by the Conservatives, ending Tory 'patronage, sleaze and secrecy'. Mr Michael Meacher, shadow public service minister, said Labour would abolish many quangos, introduce tighter controls on party funding and bring in legislation to open up the workings of Whitehall: 'We must and will raise standards of conduct in public life. Tory Britain today has become Corruption Incorporated.' On the issue of devolution, the conference defused a potential row with its Welsh MPs by committing Labour to the creation of a Welsh assembly in its first year of government. In recent days, MPs from the principality had expressed concern that the Labour leadership was leaning towards the creation of a Scottish assembly within 12 months of taking office without making the same commitment to Wales. The conference yesterday voted to give equal prominence to devolution for both regions and calling for elected regional government in England. However, there is less certainty over the party's attitude to reform of the House of Lords. Mr Tony Blair has said that the party would end the right of hereditary peers to vote on laws. But the conference went much further than this yesterday by reasserting its call for abolition of the House of Lords and the creation of a replacement second chamber.
19941029000000000	FT  29 OCT 94 / Welsh and Scots step up calls for Ulster-style deal. The government is facing growing demands from Welsh and Scottish nationalists for equal constitutional treatment with Northern Ireland, including the establishment of devolved assemblies. Nationalists in both countries see the Ulster peace talks as the trigger for a campaign to highlight the contradictions between the government's approach to Northern Ireland and its handling of Scotland and Wales. Nationalists intend to contrast the government's reluctance to acknowledge peaceful demands for Scottish and Welsh devolution with its willingness to negotiate with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, if the Northern Ireland ceasefire holds. Mr Dafydd Wigley, president of Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party, yesterday stepped up the campaign at the party's conference in Llandudno, appealing to Mr John Major to recognise that Ulster and Wales have equal rights to self-determination. 'In the name of democracy, consistency and political justice, I appeal to the prime minister to recognise the morally indefensible position of denying these self-same rights to the people of Wales,' he said. 'If John Major can tell the people of the six counties of Northern Ireland that if it is their wish, democratically expressed, that they can unite with the Irish Republic . . . by what token can he deny that self-same degree of sovereignty to the people of Wales and of Scotland?' The issue was raised in the Commons on Thursday by Mr Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National party, in a barbed intervention at prime minister's question time. Congratulating Mr Major on the apparent success of his Northern Ireland policy, Mr Salmond pointed out that it hinged on the right of the people of Northern Ireland to determine their own future. 'For the avoidance of any doubt, will you confirm that you also believe in the right of self-determination for the Scottish nation?' he asked. Mr Major, who fell back on claims that devolution would raise taxes, appeared to have no answer to a line of questioning that promises to become increasingly embarrassing for the government.
19941203000000000	FT  03 DEC 94 / Labour postpones devolution answers. The way Scotland would be represented at Westminster after a Labour government had set up a Scottish parliament can be decided only after Labour has implemented all the changes it plans for the UK's regions. Mr George Robertson, the shadow Scottish secretary, said yesterday that the party was embarking on a dynamic process of constitutional change. There would not be a 'pat answer' to every question concerning future regional representation at Westminster. New anomalies would be created, he said. Mr Robertson reiterated Labour's commitment to establish a Scottish parliament and a Welsh assembly in its first year in office. It would then set up regional assemblies in different parts of England. Labour has been criticised by the Conservatives for failing to give detailed answers to the questions of how Scotland and Wales will be represented at Westminster after their assemblies are established. In particular it has been challenged to answer the so-called West Lothian question: why should Scottish MPs at Westminster be able to legislate for matters such as education in England while English MPs will not be able to legislate for education in Scotland? Mr Robertson told the Scottish constitutional convention, an unofficial body boycotted by the Tories and the Scottish National party, that there would be 'no precise point where everything must instantly adapt to accommodate just some of the new institutions'. Rather than get lost in 'the forest of detail and constitutional porridge', it was more important to tell people what the Scottish parliament 'can do and will do to change their lives'. It should outline options for issues such as housing, community care, education, transport and the health service.
19941231000000000	FT  31 DEC 94 / Blair prepares for fight on devolution and Lords' reform: PM attacks opposition's 'dangerous' policy. Mr Tony Blair will today signal the start of a constitutional battle with the Tories by setting out proposals for devolution - condemned yesterday by Mr John Major as 'one of the most dangerous propositions ever put before the British nation'. The Labour leader plans to use a long-planned interview on BBC radio to mount a strong defence of his plans to set up a Scottish parliament and a Welsh assembly, reform the House of Lords and trim the monarchy. Officials said he would reject Mr Major's demand, in a BBC radio interview yesterday, for referendums on plans to establish the Scottish and Welsh assemblies in the first year of a Labour government. Mr Blair will argue that referendums are unnecessary because the legislation will have been preceded by a general election in which the voters will be offered a clear choice between the main parties' manifestos. Labour officials dismissed the prime minister's attack on their +++++++ End of Leg 1 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ plans for Scotland and Wales as a sign of his 'desperate' need to divert attention from the government's problems over Europe. However, leaders of both parties believe domestic constitutional issues will be at the forefront of the next election campaign, alongside the UK's relationship with the European Union. Mr Major, who sees his decision to campaign for the integrity of the UK as a crucial factor in the Conservatives' 1992 election victory, used his interview to attack Labour's motives. Claiming Labour leaders had failed to think through devolution, the prime minister warned of a constitutional impasse if a Scottish National party majority in the Scottish parliament sought to secede from the UK. 'It is done for short-term political advantage to the Labour party because they are seeking to cash in on the innate pride in being Scottish that the Scots feel, and they have given no thought whatsoever to the future unity of the UK,' he said. The prime minister's playing of the constitutional card prompted a derisive response from Mr George Foulkes, a Scottish Labour frontbencher, who said Mr Major had 'gone completely off his rocker'. Mr Menzies Campbell, a Scottish Liberal Democrat, said home rule would strengthen the UK, and warned that 'blind refusal to acknowledge the need for constitutional reform' played into the hands of the separatists. Mr Major, in an attempt to douse the flames of Tory battles over Europe, forecast an end to Conservative divisions on the issue. The depth of hostility between the party's opposing factions was made clear, however, by Sir Edward Heath, the former prime minister, who urged Tory pro-Europeans to unite to prevent a Eurosceptic takeover. Meanwhile Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary emphasised his Eurosceptic views in an interview in today's Daily Telegraph. He suggested the European Court of Justice should be reined back. Labour prepares for minimum wage battle, Page 4
