10000000000000000	bombing of US embassies in Africa How were the bombings of the US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania conducted   What terrorist groups and individuals were responsible  How and were the attacks planned.
19980809163000000	Solid construction may have kept toll low in Tanzania embassy. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ The bomb outside the U.S. Embassy in Tanzania was so powerful that it shook furniture in homes a mile away. 
19980812074500000	Australian said among those arrested for Tanzania embassy bombing. CANBERRA, Australia (AP) _ An Australian man who was among 14 foreigners arrested in connection with the U.S. Embassy bombing in Tanzania has been released, Australian officials said Wednesday. 
19980813023400000	Kenya detains several people and U.S. says two are suspects. NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ The Kenyan government has detained several people in connection with the U.S. Embassy bombing in Nairobi and U.S. law enforcement sources say two are considered suspects. 
19980814000000000	Clinton Vows to Find Embassy Bombers. WASHINGTON, August 13 (Xinhua) -- President Bill Clinton Thursday condemned terrorist bomb attacks at U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and vowed to find the bombers and bring them to justice. "No matter what it takes, we must find those responsible for these evil acts and see that justice is done," Clinton said at the ceremony marking the return of remains of Americans who were killed in the Kenya embassy bombing. The ceremony was held at Andrews Air Force Base, near Washington, where 10 of 12 American victims of the Kenya embassy bombing were brought back by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. Clinton said the United States will not retreat from the world because of terrorist attacks. Albright, echoing the president, said the United States would "continue to be present around the world, wherever we have interests to defend." "We will do all we can to protect our diplomatic and military peoples around the world," she said. Clinton met with his top aides Wednesday in the White House to assess the situation following the twin bombings at U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, which have killed more than 250 people and injured over 5,000, most of them Kenyans and Tanzanians. Twelve Americans were killed in the Kenya embassy bombing. Clinton ordered an assessment of what it would cost to rebuild the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and the price tag for emergency response teams sent to the two countries. He also asked for a "list of the priorities for improving security for U.S. facilities around the world." The State Department and the Office of Management and Budget will jointly make the assessments "in the next few days," and the president will present the report to Congress for more emergency funding.
19980815140200000	U.S. TENTATIVELY LINKS MILITANT SAUDI BUSINESSMAN TO AFRICA BOMBINGS. WASHINGTON _ Federal law enforcement officials said Saturday that they had obtained information tentatively linking an associate of Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi businessman who has vowed to wage a holy war against the United States, to the bombing of the American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The officials declined to specify the nature of the evidence connecting Bin Laden to the bombings. But Saturday's issue of Newsday reported that a witness had identified a Bin Laden associate as having been in the truck carrying the bomb that damaged the U.S. Embassy in the capital of Kenya and killed more than 200 people. The newspaper identified the witness as one of the two privately employed security guards working at the embassy gate at the time of the bombing. In interviews Saturday, intelligence and law enforcement officials who asked not to be identified said there had not been positive identification of the suspect, who was described as a relatively low-level member of Bin Laden's circle. But officials indicated that this was the first potential evidence leading to Bin Laden, whom the FBI and the CIA have suspected from the start was a key figure in the bombing plot. American officials have cited him since the early hours of the investigation. This year he renewed his vow to wage a holy war against the United States, and senior officials have said he has a network in Africa, with U.S. intelligence finding evidence that he has operatives in Kenya. Although officials caution that there has been no hard evidence linking Bin Laden or his agents to the bombings, Americans point to the nearly simultaneous explosions on Aug. 7 as a sign that the attacks were carried out by sophisticated terrorists. Bin Laden's network has the financial resources and the organization to have been the mastermind, the officials said. Another group suspected by the United States is the Cairo-based Islamic Jihad, but it, too, is financed by Bin Laden, American officials said. The son of a wealthy Saudi family that made its money in the construction business, Bin Laden is thought to have been involved in the bombings of two U.S. military installations in Saudi Arabia. But for lack of evidence, the United States has never issued an arrest warrant for him. Bin Laden lived for a time in the Sudan. He is said to live in Afghanistan now, under the protection of the Taliban, the fundamentalist Islamic group that controls most of the country. &QL;
19980816063900000	Pakistan hands over bombing suspect to Kenya. ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) _ A suspect in the recent bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania was arrested by Pakistani authorities and handed over to Kenya, a foreign ministry spokesman said Sunday. 
19980821000000000	Grenade Man Identified in Nairobi, Two More Held. NAIROBI, August 21 (Xinhua) -- The man who hurled a grenade at security guards at the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi seconds before the deadly bomb exploded on August 7 has been positively identified as two more people arrested, Kenya's national newspapers said Friday. Khalid Mohammed, a suspect held by the Kenyan-U.S. joint probe team following the bomb raid, was picked out by three of eight witnesses Thursday, according to a report from the Daily Nation newspaper. The report said it now appears that only two suicide bombers died in the blast, compared with earlier reports that all the three bombers who drove to the embassy died. "The man who was positively identified was slightly injured by the August 7 blast but he escaped with minor wounds which have healed. This is the man who jumped from the pick-up at the parking bay of the embassy, hurled a grenade at the guards before the bomb exploded," the report quoted a source as saying. It said Khalid, who can not speak English or Kiswahili but only Arabic, was identified by a guard and a civilian worker at the embassy and a third witness. The witnesses also sustained injuries from flying objects. Director of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Louis Freech is expected to issue a statement about the bombing probe before he leaves Nairobi for Washington at noon Friday. He came here Thursday evening after a one-day visit to Tanzania. On Thursday, the investigators also raided offices of Mercy Relief International Agency, a non-governmental organization, in the Kenyan capital Thursday and arrested an Arab and a Sudanese, the East African Standard newspaper reported. Local sources said the plan to bomb U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania took three months to complete and bombers destined for Kenya were dispatched through Somali and Rwanda. A senior government official who saw the confessions of suspects was quoted by local media Friday as saying that an Egyptian Islamic Jihad group, linked with Saudi millionaire Osama Bin Laden, who now lives in Afghanistan, planned the attacks. The car bomb attack at the u.s. embassy in Nairobi reportedly killed 253 people and injured some 5,000 more. A nearly simultaneous car bombing outside the U.S. embassy in tanzania killed 10 people and wounded about 70 others. U.S. President Bill Clinton Thursday ordered air raids on terror facilities allegedly used by Laden in Afghanistan and Sudan in a clear revenge attack for the bombings. Earlier, the U.S.'s demand for Laden's extradition from Afghanistan has been refused by the Taliban government.
19980826073700000	Bomb-interrupted talks concluded; Tanzania toll rises to 12. NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ U.S. Ambassador Prudence Bushnell wrapped up some unfinished business on Wednesday, meeting with Kenya's trade minister to finish talks that were interrupted by the car bombing of the embassy. 
19980827025800000	Report: Bombing suspect flown to the United States. NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ A Yemeni citizen who is a suspect in the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi has been flown to the United States, a newspaper reported Thursday. 
19980828000000000	Suspects in Kenyan Embassy Bombing Sent to U.S.. WASHINGTON, August 27 (Xinhua) -- Two suspects involved in the bombing of U.S. embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, have been brought to New York for trial, U.S. officials said on Thursday. The first suspect, Khalid Salim, was flown by the FBI to New York, the officials said. But the exact date of Salim's arrest was not known. The U.S. federal prosecutors said they expected the suspect to be arraigned at midday in Manhattan federal court. FBI Director Louis Freeh, Attorney General Janet Reno and other senior U.S. government officials will hold a news conference at 1 p.m. EDT (1700GMT) at FBI headquarters in Washington "to announce developments in the investigation of the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania," the FBI said in a statement. Salim is suspected of throwing a hand grenade to guards outside the Naairobi embassy at the start of the bombing attack, a U.S. law enforcement official said in Washington. Another suspect, Mohammed Saddiq Odeh, was also flown to New York, according to a diplomatic source in Nairobi. Odeh has been held by Kenyan authorities since August 14, a week after his arrest in Karachi, Pakistan, on the day of the bombing. The U.S. officials said others among the several suspects in custody in Kenya could also be sent to the United States for trial. Kenyan officials were said to be eager to seek justice for the hundreds of Kenyan victims of the embassy bombing, but also wary that a trial for an attack on a U.S. target in Kenya might invite new terrorist assaults on Kenyan targets.
19980829113500000	Seven arrested, but not disclosed if suspects in embassy blast. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Police said Saturday that seven people had been arrested in a sweep following the bombing of the U.S. Embassy here three weeks ago, but did not say whether those detained were suspected in connection with the attack. 
19980905062600000	Investigators have uncovered details on bombing. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Investigators in the Aug. 7 bombing of the American Embassy in Tanzania said Saturday they had made ``great strides,'' having already determined what the bomb was made of and who carried it to the embassy. 
19980905064500000	Investigators have uncovered details on bombing. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Investigators in the Aug. 7 bombing of the American Embassy in Tanzania said Saturday they had made ``extraordinary discoveries,'' having determined what the bomb was made of and who carried it to the embassy. 
19980911083600000	Tanzania expels Iraqis, Libyan questioned in U.S. embassy bombings. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Tanzania expelled five Iraqis and a Libyan who were questioned by the FBI and police in connection of the bombing of two U.S. embassies in East Africa last month, a newspaper reported Friday. 
19980918084600000	Tanzania expells 14 foreigners questioned in embassy bombing. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Tanzania has expelled 14 foreigners questioned in connection with the Aug. 7 bombing of the U.S. Embassy here. 
19980919075300000	Two suspects in embassy bombing to be prosecuted in Tanzania. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ Two suspects held in connection with the Aug. 7 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Tanzania will be charged in a local court next week, a newspaper said Saturday. 
19980921200100000	TANZANIA CHARGES TWO IN BOMBING OF AMERICAN EMBASSY. NAIROBI, Kenya _ Tanzania charged two men on Monday with 11 counts of murder in connection with the bombing of the U.S. Embassy there on Aug. 7. The action contrasted markedly to a decision by Kenya, where the American Embassy was bombed on the same day. Kenya has sent two suspects to the United States, where they have been indicted, and diplomats suggested that the Tanzanian decision set up a potential diplomatic conflict with the United States and might hamper the investigation. In Kenya, 236 Kenyans and 12 Americans were killed. Eleven people died in Tanzania. With three FBI agents in court on Monday in Dar es Salaam, the Tanzanian capital, the government provided no details beyond the defendants' names. But authorities in Kenya and diplomats said that one man, Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed, was interrogated in the fall about terrorist activities in Kenya, including a plot to bomb the American Embassy, and that he was wanted in Egypt for terrorist activities. While living in Kenya from 1994 to last year, Ahmed's life paralleled that of Wahid el Hage, who was indicted last week in New York and has been accused of working with Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born financier whom the United States believes was behind the embassy bombings. Ahmed and el Hage, of Arlington, Texas, arrived here in 1994 and went into gem trading. They were interrogated in the fall, el Hage in the United States, shortly leaving Kenya, and Ahmed here. It is not publicly known what prompted the interrogations, in which the two told of knowing bin Laden, officials said. In his interrogation Ahmed provided details of a plot to attack the American Embassy using three vehicles, said a report last month in The Nation, a respected independent newspaper here. An American diplomat said Monday that the threat had been dismissed as not serious. In Tanzanian Magistrate's Court on Monday, Ahmed, an Egyptian, and the other defendant, Rashid Saleh Hemed, a Tanzanian, did not enter formal pleas. Ahmed told the court that he did not understand how he could be charged because on the day of the bombings he was in Arusha, 300 miles north of the capital, on the border with Kenya. One defendant indicted in the United States in the bombings, Mohamed Saddiq Odeh, has said an Egyptian named Mustafa had led the Tanzanian operation. In a statement to authorities in Pakistan, Odeh, who was caught returning from Kenya on a false passport, also said he went to Kenya in 1994 on an invitation from Mustafa, according to a Pakistani summary of the interrogation. In his interrogation by Kenyan officials in the fall, Ahmed said that he had grown up and gone to primary school in Zaire, later attending Al Azhar University in Cairo, where he received a degree in agricultural engineering. He said he worked in Kuwait for the Defense Ministry from 1980 until August 1990, when Iraq invaded Kuwait. He returned to Zaire to set up a gem business and did deals, he said, for Mobutu Sese Seko, the country's dictator, who was overthrown last year. Ahmed moved here in 1994 and set up a branch of his gem business here, he told the police. He also told the police that he was well acquainted with Islamic radicals and provided them with details about a plot to blow up the American and Israeli Embassies. He said that three vehicles would be used to attack the American embassy, and that on Oct. 22, 1997, he and another man took pictures of both embassies. The Kenyans passed that information to the embassy, information that the American diplomat, who insisted on anonymity, said was found not to be credible. Egypt has a ``big criminal file'' on Ahmed, arising out of his terrorist activities there, said an official in Tanzania, who added, ``They have enough to bring him to trial in Egypt and in the United States.'' Egypt has not requested his extradition and is not very likely to, preferring to leave the issue to the United States, a person in the Egyptian Foreign Office said. The American Embassy in Tanzania declined to answer whether the United States has or would request Ahmed's extradition. Two senior diplomats accredited to Tanzania said they thought that Tanzania would resist efforts to have Ahmed or Hemed extradited. Tanzania, they noted, has long sought to assert its independence from the United States and other world powers.
19980921200600000	Two indicted for murder in U.S. Embassy bombing in Tanzania. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ A Tanzanian and an Egyptian face death by hanging after Tanzanian authorities charged the men with murder in connection with the U.S. Embassy bombing in Tanzania. 
19980926082700000	FBI returns to house where bomb could have been assembled. NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ FBI agents have returned to a white two-story house in a new development on the outskirts of Nairobi believed to be the one rented by a suspect in the U.S. Embassy bombing in Kenya that killed 248 people, the new tenants said Saturday. 
19981005043800000	Suspect released into police custody to help with investigation. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ A magistrate Monday granted a prosecution request to release into police custody one of two suspects charged in the bombing of the U.S. Embassy to assist in the investigation for five days. 
19981014070800000	Egyptian suspect raises questions. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ An Egyptian formally charged in the Aug. 7 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam has been providing investigators with a lot of information but has been less than forthcoming about his role in the blast, sources close to the investigation say. 
19981016105000000	Investigators identify vehicle used in U.S. Embassy bombing. DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania (AP) _ A refrigerator truck transported the bomb that killed at least 11 people and extensively damaged the U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam, the FBI said Friday. 
19981102112200000	Victims of embassy bombing harassed, aid group says. NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ The Red Cross said Monday it is investigating complaints of harassment from relatives of those killed in the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Kenya. 
19981216204200000	INDICTMENT SAYS 5 WORKED WITH BIN LADEN IN TANZANIA BLAST. NEW YORK _ Federal prosecutors charged Wednesday that the American Embassy in Tanzania was attacked by at least six men who detonated a bomb packed with car batteries and oxygen tanks, apparently to enhance the lethal force of the explosion. One of the bombers died in the assault, which killed 11 people and wounded more than 80, while another photographed the destruction before fleeing, prosecutors asserted in a new indictment returned Wednesday. The indictment provides the first detailed account of the bombing on Aug. 7 of the American Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. It accuses five men of conspiring with Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who is suspected of organizing the simultaneous bomb attacks on the embassies in Tanzania and Kenya as well as other acts of terrorism against Americans abroad. All five of the new suspects are at large, authorities said, and each faces charges for which he could, if eventually convicted, face the death penalty in the United States. The government announced rewards of up to $5 million each for information leading to the arrest or capture of the new suspects, matching a similar amount being offered in the case of bin Laden and two other associates. The indictment brings to 14 the number of men known to have been charged by federal prosecutors in their investigation of the embassy bombings and bin Laden's global organization. Four of those are in custody in New York and two others are awaiting extradition from Germany and Britain. ``Today's charges reaffirm the mutual and unrelenting resolve of Tanzania and Kenya and American authorities to find, apprehend and prosecute every single person who participated in the murderous terrorist bombings in East Africa,'' Mary Jo White, the U.S. attorney in Manhattan, said at a news conference. Prosecutors did not charge the two men who are being held in Tanzania in connection with the bombing. One of those men, Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed, walked into the American embassy late last year and warned authorities about a plot to blow up the embassy in Nairobi. American officials have declined to say why they are not seeking his extradition. The government has previously charged bin Laden and associates with the bombing in Tanzania, but until now has provided few details. Previous indictments in the case have been much more expansive about the bombing of the Nairobi embassy, which left more than 200 dead and thousands injured. In the latest indictment, prosecutors suggest the two attacks were coordinated so as to occur almost simultaneously in the two countries, under the supervision of members of bin Laden's group. For example, the indictment describes a meeting between one of the suspects in the Tanzania attack, Mustafa Mohamed Fadhil, an Egyptian in his early 20s, and Mohamed Sadeek Odeh, who has since been arrested and charged in the Kenya attack. It says they discussed a fatwa, or religious opinion, in which bin Laden called for attacks against Americans. In June, Fadhil and another suspect in Tanzania rented a villa in Dar es Salaam, which became the ``bomb factory,'' prosecutors charged.. Around that time, the indictment says, Odeh and other Kenya-based operatives were preparing in that country for the attack in Nairobi. In June and July, the indictment says, the suspects in Tanzania bought a 1987 Nissan Atlas truck to carry the bomb to the embassy, and a white Suzuki Samurai, in which the suspects would flee. The suspects arranged for welding and other mechanical work to be done on the truck, apparently to equip it to carry the bomb, the indictment says. They also were said to have bought oxygen and acetylene tanks and two large truck batteries. Experts say these are typically used to augment the ignition and explosion of a bomb. On Aug. 5, two days before the bombings, one of the conspirators in Tanzania telephoned a counterpart in Nairobi, the indictment says. Suspects in each country fled just before the bombings occurred, it says. On Aug. 6, for example, the night before the attacks, Odeh flew on Pakistani International Airways Flight (NU)746 to Karachi, Pakistan, along with one of the suspects who helped to prepare the Tanzania attack, the indictment says. It says the men left on instructions from other members of bin Laden's group. On Aug. 7, a man described only as ``Ahmed the German'' detonated the explosive device in Dar es Salaam, which was being carried in the Nissan Atlas truck along with the tanks and batteries. He died in the explosion. Minutes later, another operative who was riding in the Suzuki Samurai photographed the embassy ruins as he left the scene, the indictment said. In addition to Fadhil, the other four men charged Wednesday were two Tanzanians, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed and Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, each 24, and two Kenyans, Fahid Mohammed Ally Msalam, 22, and Sheikh Ahmed Salim Swedan, 29.
19990203000000000	U.S. Concerned for More Terrorist Attacks. WASHINGTON, February 2 (Xinhua) -- The United States is concerned over more "terrorist" attacks by forces of Osama bin Laden, the man allegedly linked with last year's U.S. embassy bombings in Africa, CIA Director George Tenet said Tuesday. "We have noted recent activity similar to what occurred prior to the African embassy bombings... And I must tell you we are concerned that one or more of bin Laden's attacks could occur at any time," Tenet told the Senate Armed Services Committee. "We are anticipating bombing attempts with conventional explosives, but his operatives are also capable of kidnappings and assassinations," he said. Saudi suspect bin Laden is accused of plotting the bomb attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania last August that killed 250 people. "There is not the slightest doubt that Osama bin Laden, his worldwide allies, and his sympathizers are planning further attacks against us," Tenet said. The United States is offering up to 5 million dollars for information leading to bin Laden's arrest or conviction for his alleged role in the embassy bombings.
