10000000000000000	corporate financial crime sentencing What sentences are being imposed for financial crimes such as fraud and embezzlement   What are the current trends in prosecuting and sentencing for this type of crime   Are judges claiming to be sending any messages to other would be criminals in their sentencing practices.
19890101000000000	1988; THE YEAR IN REVIEW; 1988: A HUMBLING YEAR FOR THE MIGHTY. In Orange County in 1988, the natural disasters were few. The human misfortunes were many. The ground didn't shake too much, and even the drought-parched canyons did not ignite. True, there was the winter storm early in the year that caused the newly rebuilt Huntington Beach Pier to collapse. But that was nothing compared to the collapse of careers and the tumbling of stature among many of the county's once-towering figures. It was the year that the mighty fell: * A rising star in the Republican Party plummeted when he forged a signature on a check in a last-ditch effort to bail out his campaign for Congress. * A millionaire video producer from Newport Beach was charged with making illegal campaign contributions to failed Democratic presidential hopeful Gary Hart and other candidates. * An Orange County supervisor, running for Congress, was caught red-faced when it was revealed that she did not graduate from college, as her biographies stated. * Even the always-powerful Orange County Republican Party took it on the chin when it posted uniformed security guards at polling places in Latino areas of Santa Ana to warn non-citizens not to vote, prompting an FBI investigation into allegations of voter intimidation. Indeed, 1988 was the election year that many people would like to forget. In January, the venerable Rep. Robert E. Badham (R-Newport Beach), a six-term congressman, surprised supporters by announcing that he would not run for reelection, which opened the door to a free-for-all that led to a promising young politician's demise. C. David Baker, Irvine city councilman and former college basketball star, seemed to be the heir-apparent to Badham's seat until C. Christopher Cox gave him a run for his money in the June primary. And when that money began to run short in the final days before the election, a desperate Baker turned to the bank account of a nonprofit health foundation that he directed for an advance on a loan that was a few days late. He wrote a $48,000 check to himself, signing his own name and forging the signature of a judge, a foundation director. He stopped payment on the check shortly after it was written, but the damage was done. Baker, who was narrowly defeated by Cox, pleaded guilty to a felony forgery count, but a Superior Court judge later reduced the charge to a misdemeanor. The judge ordered Baker to perform community service and gave him a year's probation and a 1-year suspended jail sentence. "Regardless of what the penalty was today, this will not be over," Baker said on the day he was sentenced. Even when the sentence was imposed, Baker was delivering hot meals to the elderly and working with children. "Some good will come out of this one way or another. I'm not really sure how." Another legislative seat unexpectedly opened with the death of Assemblyman Richard E. Longshore (R-Santa Ana) the day after voters nominated him for a second term. That opened up a king-sized contest between Republicans and Democrats for his seat, and that race, too, led to a finish-line stumble.  Sent Out the Guards In their fervor to see their candidate, Curt Pringle, win, county Republican Party officials not only got out the vote on Nov. 8, they also sent out the guards. Uniformed security guards were hired by the party to stand watch at heavily Latino polling places to warn people that it was illegal for non-citizens to vote. The Democrats cried foul, and even high-ranking Republicans denounced the move. The FBI and district attorney's office are now investigating whether election laws were violated, and several Latino and labor organizations have filed suit to overturn the election results in the 72nd Assembly District, where Pringle ended up winning by a mere 867 votes. Supervisor Harriett M. Wieder's election foibles left her with a red face. Running for Congress in the June primary, Wieder conceded under pressure from her opponent that she had left uncorrected a 25-year-old error on her biography that stated she had received a bachelor's degree in journalism from Wayne State University in Detroit. In truth, she was unable to attend college because of family finances. Also under fire from slow-growth advocates for her votes on development agreements, Wieder lost the race.  Karl Stubbed His Toe Republicans did not have a monopoly on election-year problems. Stuart Karl Jr., the millionaire producer of the Jane Fonda workout tapes, was fined $60,000 and placed on 3 years' probation for making $185,000 in illegal campaign contributions to self-destructing presidential candidate Gary Hart and others. "To be honest, I'm not sure why I did these things," Karl said after his sentencing. "You're attracted to the lure of being involved. People begin to make you feel important. I should have looked deeper and not done the things I did. . . . " Hamburger magnate Carl N. Karcher also took a tumble. Known for his fast food and patriotism, the founder of Carl's Jr. restaurants was accused by the federal government of insider trading, for allegedly tipping off his relatives about some bad news that his company was about to release. While a federal judge has ruled that Karcher's son, Carl Leo Karcher, did engage in the illegal behavior, the case against the senior Karcher is still pending. "These charges are totally false," Karcher said after the civil lawsuit was filed in April. "My wife and I did not sell any of our stock, nor did we tell anyone else to do so. . . . To suggest that any of us would intentionally violate the securities laws is highly offensive."  Crystal Cathedral Cutback Even God's squad was taken down a notch or two in 1988. While televangelist Robert H. Schuller stayed clear of the scandals that rocked his collared colleagues, the fallout hit the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove. In May, Schuller announced sharp cutbacks in his "Hour of Power" broadcast ministry, a result of reduced contributions because of televangelism scandal "shock waves," the October, 1987, stock market crash and the decision by a New York City cable television station to eliminate paid religious programming. Still, not everyone had a bad 1988. Braving the Siberian cold, marathon swimmer Lynne Cox of Los Alamitos became the first person to navigate a significant distance across the Soviet Union's Lake Baikal, the world's deepest lake. America's darling and Placentia's own Janet Evans won three gold medals in the pool at the Summer Olympics in Seoul. And despite the misfortunes of other politicians, two former White House aides were launched on promising careers. Cox, after toughing it out with Baker in the congressional primary, sailed to easy victory in November. Dana Rohrabacher, after tipping off voters to Wieder's erroneous resume, was elected to the 42nd Congressional District post that was vacated by Daniel E. Lungren (R-Long Beach), who tried -- and failed -- to become the state's treasurer.  Political Comeback Still, there was perhaps no bigger political comeback in Orange County in 1988 than the one that took place on a gentle hillside in Yorba Linda. The honoree was not able to attend, but hundreds of supporters gathered to watch a bulldozer scrape up the first bucket of dirt where a library soon will stand to house the papers and mementos of Orange County's native son and the nation's only resigned president, Richard M. Nixon. Times Orange County Edition librarian Dan Crump assisted in the research of this article.
19890112000000000	EX-NORWALK OFFICIAL SENTENCED IN FRAUD CASE. Former Norwalk City Administrator William H. Kraus was sentenced in federal court in San Diego to five years' probation and fined $1,000 for his part in a land-fraud scheme that bilked investers out of more than $3 million. Kraus, 50, is also required to pay $20,000 in restitution over the next 4 1/2 years to victims. U.S. District Judge Rudi M. Brewster sentenced Kraus on Monday. The former city administrator pleaded guilty in 1987 to one count of mail fraud, which carries a maximum sentence of five years in prison and a $1,000 fine. But in an interview this week, Kraus maintained he was not involved in the scam and that he was held responsible for the actions of a co-defendant. "If I had had the resources to have legally fought it all the way, the determination would have been different," said Kraus, who resigned from his Norwalk post in 1983 after questions arose about personal business dealings unrelated to the current case. Kraus and seven other men were charged in 1985 with 23 counts of mail fraud in the use of two companies, one in California and one in Utah, to defraud investors. Some of the victims lost money by purchasing real estate at artificially inflated prices. The majority lost money by investing in a company that promised a 36% to 48% annual return based on what turned out to be a series of phony transactions. In all, from 50 to 100 investors lost about $3.6 million. The victims were from California, Utah and other states. Special Assistant U.S. Atty. Michael R. Pent, the prosecutor in the case, said Kraus received a relatively light sentence because he played a limited role in the fraud ring and because he agreed to cooperate with prosecutors. Pent said Kraus would have testified against his co-defendants had they been tried. "We did evaluate his culpability as less than the others," Pent said. "We informed the court that he did cooperate in the manner we requested. As far as we know, he was ready to testify as per the (plea) agreement." The charge to which Kraus pleaded guilty involved a single San Diego County property. Pent said Kraus allowed a beach condominium to be bought under his name in 1981. He then transferred the title to a co-defendant, and paid for appraisals that greatly inflated the property's worth, Pent said. Two investors in the property lost about $50,000, said Pent, who added that there was no proof Kraus made any money off the deal. Kraus left his Norwalk job in 1983 after a decade as the city's administrator. Kraus said he is now self-employed, running a Garden Grove firm called William H. Kraus & Associates. The firm manages three nonprofit associations in Los Angeles and Orange counties, Kraus said. Kraus has a Ph.D. in public administration and taught a class called "Foundations of Non-Profit Association Management" as recently as last year at California State University, Long Beach. A university spokeswoman said Kraus is not scheduled to teach at the university during the spring semester. Kraus said he will teach at three Southern California colleges this spring but he declined to identify them.  Another Sentenced Another defendant was sentenced along with Kraus on Monday. Charles Carrasco, a former member of the Del Mar Fair Board, received a 90-day sentence, was fined $100 and paid $10,000 in restitution, Pent said. Carrasco pleaded guilty to misdemeanor obstruction of the mails, which carries a maximum sentence of six months in jail and a $100 fine. The restitution money will go into a fund that will be divided among the victims. Four other defendants in the case are scheduled to be sentenced next month and in May on charges ranging from mail fraud to accessory after the fact to mail fraud. The prosecution of another defendant has been deferred and will be dropped if he pays $30,000 in restitution and serves community service, Pent said. Yet another defendant, Lynn Dale Bogart of San Diego pleaded guilty in 1986 to one count of mail fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit mail fraud. He is serving a 10-year prison term on those charges and a separate counterfeiting charge.
19890128000000000	LAROUCHE GETS 15-YEAR TERM, IS DENIED BAIL. A federal judge, bluntly rejecting claims that the government's prosecution was politically motivated, sentenced political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. to 15 years in prison on mail and tax fraud convictions Friday and refused to release him on bail while he appeals. District Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr. imposed prison terms and fines on six LaRouche associates and ordered their immediate incarceration also. In a courtroom exchange before sentencing, Bryan dismissed as "arrant nonsense" a charge by LaRouche legal coordinator Edward Spannaus that politically motivated prosecutors were seeking to "crush LaRouche's organization." The notion that LaRouche's organization posed a sufficient threat to warrant prosecution "just defies human experience," the judge said. LaRouche and his aides were convicted by a jury on Dec. 16 of bilking numerous supporters out of more than $30 million by deliberately defaulting on loans from them. The four-time independent candidate for President was also found guilty of evading federal income taxes since at least 1979. He was accused of fraudulently having all of his personal expenses paid by various corporations that he controls and then contending that he has no taxable income. LaRouche, a former Marxist, now embraces a number of causes on the far right and is noted for espousing bizarre conspiracy theories, such as one linking Queen Elizabeth II and Henry A. Kissinger to drug traffickers. LaRouche had no visible reaction when the sentence was imposed. He and the other defendants were handcuffed and led from the courthouse to a van, which took them to the Alexandria city jail, where they will remain until they can be assigned to a federal prison. At the same time LaRouche was being sentenced, federal prosecutors dropped all charges in a related case against LaRouche, six associates and five political organizations in U.S. District Court in Boston. That case, involving charges that LaRouche's 1984 presidential campaign had raised more than $2 million through credit card and loan fraud, ended in a mistrial last May. A new trial had been scheduled to begin on Feb. 23. But the U.S. attorney's office said that, in view of LaRouche's conviction in Virginia, further prosecution was not warranted. In a rambling statement before he was sentenced, LaRouche declared that he was "innocent of any wrongdoing." He said that a high-ranking British intelligence official had told him that he could influence the outcome of his trial by responding to certain "unknown conditions." However, LaRouche added, he refused to bargain for justice. LaRouche said also that his case "already has done great damage to the United States" and that "it is time for this evil and reckless prosecution to be brought to a halt before further damage is done." Assistant U.S. Atty. Kent Robinson shot back: "This is not a political case. This was a case of theft." LaRouche, 66, could have received 65 years in prison and fines totaling $3.25 million for his conviction on 13 counts of tax and mail fraud conspiracy. He will have to serve about 10 years of his 15-year sentence before he is eligible for parole, according to a spokesman for the U.S. Parole Commission. After the sentencing, about 60 LaRouche supporters gathered outside the federal courthouse here and paraded with a bed sheet banner reading "Pardon LaRouche -- Kill Satan," the Associated Press reported. One demonstrator wore a large mask of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and carried a Soviet flag, symbolizing LaRouche's belief that he is the victim of a Soviet secret police frame-up. Supporters had sought a pardon for LaRouche from President Ronald Reagan before he left office and said that they would continue their efforts with President Bush. LaRouche spokeswoman Dana Scanlon said that supporters planned to hold a round-the-clock vigil in Lafayette Park, across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, until LaRouche is released from prison. Until a few years ago, it would have been highly unusual for people convicted of white-collar crimes, such as LaRouche, to be denied bail while they awaited the outcome of their appeals. However, several defense attorneys said the practice has become relatively common of late for two reasons. One is a 1984 change in federal sentencing law that permits immediate jailing unless there is reasonable chance of success on appeal. The other is a growing sentiment among judges that white-collar criminals should be treated the same as others. LaRouche asked that his incarceration be postponed for 60 days so that he could undergo eye surgery, but Bryan denied the request. After the jury found him guilty on all counts last month, LaRouche called his conviction "a wrong, gross, disgusting, obscene miscarriage of justice" that was the result of a long "campaign of hate" by the news media and friends of the Soviet Union within the federal government. He said that he expected to be killed in prison. Bryan sentenced chief LaRouche fund-raiser William Wertz to five years in prison and an $11,000 fine. He gave Spannaus a five-year term and a $10,000 fine. Each of four other fund-raisers -- Michael Billington, Dennis Small, Paul Greenberg and Joyce Rubinstein -- were sentenced to three years in prison and received lesser fines.
19890129000000000	FURTHER LAROUCHE CHARGES ARE DROPPED. Federal prosecutors dropped conspiracy and fraud charges against Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. on Friday, moments before a Virginia judge sentenced the political extremist to 15 years in prison for related offenses. All charges against LaRouche and six associates were dropped. The Justice Department refused to drop charges against three co-defendants who are fugitives. The Boston case -- in which LaRouche was accused of conspiring to obstruct an investigation of an alleged $2-million credit card and loan fraud -- ended in a mistrial in May after five months of testimony. A new trial was to begin in February. LaRouche was sentenced in Alexandria, Va., to 15 years in prison for scheming to defraud federal tax collectors and deliberately failing to repay more than $30 million in loans from political supporters. Assistant U.S. Atty. John Markham said the Justice Department felt dismissal was warranted because "the major participants in the Boston crimes have now received substantial sentences either in Boston or in Alexandria." "It was the Boston prosecuting effort which led to the evidence which allowed the indictment and convictions in Alexandria, and I think justice was served by the substantial sentences received," said Markham, who handled both cases. "Additional effort would be a waste of the court's time and resources. We've got nothing more to gain." LaRouche, who has run for President four times, is known for his extreme views, including support for a quarantine of AIDS victims and allegations that Britain's Queen Elizabeth is involved in drug trafficking.
19890303000000000	JUDGE GIVES 10-YEAR PRISON TERM TO ORGANIZER OF BOGUS TAX SHELTERS. A Huntington Beach tax adviser who orchestrated a bogus, multimillion-dollar tax shelter scheme drew a 10-year prison term Thursday, maintaining until the end that he didn't realize that he was doing anything wrong. "I should have known better. I didn't," 68-year-old Charles D. Spurrier told a federal judge just before his sentence. "I'm just what I say I am -- just an ordinary guy who can't see how I got myself into this." But U.S. District Judge J. Spencer Letts drew a different portrait of the gray-haired Mormon as about four dozen relatives of Spurrier and his six co-defendants in the tax scheme listened in silence in a Santa Ana courtroom. "These crimes are heinous crimes," Letts declared as he railed against what he described as a tolerance on the part of some judges to white-collar crime. On the one hand, the judge said, "this was a scheme calculated to help criminals achieve their objective without criminal risk." On the other, he added, Spurrier duped "gullible victims" who believed that they were joining a legitimate tax-shelter program. Spurrier was convicted by a federal jury in December of tax evasion, fraud and helping others file false income statements. With associates in his Trust Management Group, Spurrier attracted 5,800 people into bogus and illegal tax shelters. One of his major operations took in $11.2 million in clients' income, then returned $10.1 million of that total in nontaxable "gifts" and kept a fee for the company. Spurrier maintained throughout his trial that he did not realize what he was doing was illegal and pointed as a defense to his deep religious beliefs. He and his attorney, William A. Dougherty, maintained that Spurrier was convinced of his operation's legitimacy by the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But the jury did not believe him. Spurrier faces a maximum possible sentence of 39 years in prison and a $50,000 fine. Letts handed out a sentence that fell short of the maximum but exceeded the recommendation of probation officials. He declined to impose a fine against the now-penniless Spurrier to go along with his 10-year prison term. The six other family members and associates implicated in the tax scheme each received lesser sentences, ranging from a month in jail to several years in prison. Federal prosecutor John C. Belcher said he found Letts' sentence to be fair but somewhat lenient -- especially in light of the sharp rebuke against white-collar crime delivered by the judge just before sentencing. "He prepared everybody for very tough sentences, but it didn't really end up that way," Belcher said. Spurrier, who remained free on bond, said in an interview after the judge's decision: "I think it's a fair sentence. I expected to do better, but I have no complaints. I'm not discouraged, and I'm not frightened." Earlier, in a pre-sentencing statement to the judge, Spurrier continued to claim innocence, but added: "I'm not pleading for mercy or anything else." Letts said he would give him none, adding that crimes in pursuit of money are among the most dangerous to society. Of the defendants' assertions that they were ignorant of their wrongdoing, the judge said, "It is not uncommon for people committing a fraud to have a very high capability for self-delusion, as well as the ability to defraud others." Also sentenced Thursday on a variety of tax-fraud-related charges were: Spurrier's son, Dennis C. Spurrier, 34, to 3 years in prison and 5 years' probation; Spurrier's nephew Wayne Hill, 34, to 30 days in jail, 5 years' probation, a $2,000 fine and community service, and Spurrier's nephew Leon G. Hill, 44, to 3 years in prison, 5 years' probation and an $8,000 fine. Also sentenced were Thomas R. Smith, 37, who was given 6 months in prison and 5 years' probation; Hyrum J. Amundsen, 75, given 3 years in prison and 3 years' probation, and Amundsen's wife, Eva, 64, given 30 days in jail, 5 years on probation and community service. All the defendants remained free on bond pending appeals. In taking the case to a higher court, defense lawyers plan to argue, in part, that the prosecution was tainted by information that one juror gained from outside the trial.
19890325000000000	MINKOW ADDICTED TO MONEY, DEFENSE LAWYER TELLS COURT. Barry Minkow was a "compulsive debtor" who had an uncontrollable need for millions of dollars the way a drug addict needs a fix, his defense lawyer said Friday. In a report filed for his sentencing Monday on 57 fraud counts stemming from the 1987 collapse of his ZZZZ Best carpet-cleaning company, lawyers for Minkow recanted the young entrepreneur's defense that the mob forced him into committing the fraud and said Minkow was the victim of an unhappy childhood. "The true story of ZZZZ Best is of a young man almost constantly in debt, struggling to prove that he will not become the failure depicted by his father," attorney David E. Kenner said in his report. "In Barry Minkow's case, the hoped for 'Big Fix' was the infusion of new funds -- funds that he could only obtain through activities that caused his prosecution. Consequently, the appropriate way to see the defendant is as someone akin to . . . a drug addict, chronic alcoholic, compulsive gambler or over-eater. Each is a form of compulsive, addictive behavior, against which the person has lost control."  Stiff Sentence Sought Prosecutors in their own sentencing report called Minkow "one of the most significant white-collar criminals ever prosecuted on the West Coast" and said they will seek a sentence of at least 25 years in prison and $26 million in restitution. "During his five-year crime wave . . . Minkow carried out what, in effect, amounted to a search-and-destroy mission aimed at the trust and integrity of our financial institutions, securities markets and the public at large," prosecutors James R. Asperger and Gordon A. Greenberg said in their report. The defense report recommended a sentence of from eight to 10 years and psychological counseling. U.S. District Judge Dickran Tevrizian, who will sentence Minkow, has already imposed prison sentences ranging from a month to eight years for the other 10 defendants in the case.  Mafia Claim Minkow, 23, was the only one who went to trial, contending throughout that he was forced into fraudulently obtaining millions of dollars from banks and private investors for ZZZZ Best by a series of organized-crime figures who had infiltrated the company. Testimony in the case showed that the company's books were padded by listing millions of dollars in revenue from insurance restoration jobs -- supposedly repairing fire and flood damage to high-rise buildings -- that were entirely fabricated. Kenner said in an interview Friday that Minkow still alleges that a variety of reputed Mafia figures helped him set up the fraud and, at least at first, caused the young businessman to worry about not paying back his debts to them. But Minkow "is aware that the events that he experienced in connection with ZZZZ Best do not necessarily amount to the legal defense of duress," Kenner said. "A better explanation" for the role the mob figures played, however, is "probably . . . a carrot-and-stick approach," Kenner said. "I think probably Barry enjoyed the money, enjoyed the publicity, and I think that it became very easy for Barry to rationalize the life style and to continue to do what he was doing," he said. In his report, Kenner portrayed Minkow as the victim of a troubled childhood. Minkow was continually berated by his father for his lack of athletic ability and often played with his sisters' friends, because he had no playmates his own age, the report said. His hyperactivity caused him problems in school, where Minkow had "an uncontrollable need" to be the center of attention, according to a psychologist's evaluation quoted in the defense report. "He learned how to lie in the fifth through eighth grades when his father insisted that no tales be told out of the house about his mother's disturbances, his father's unemployment or why the gas (at his home) was turned off" when the family could not pay the bill, psychologist Paula Smith-Marder wrote. As a teen-ager, the defense said, Minkow loaned others money at usurious interest rates, passed bad checks and later fell under the influence in his business of reputed organized-crime figures, such as the late Jack Catain and "stock fraud artist" Maurice Rind, who has been named by authorities as a suspect in the ZZZZ Best case but has not been charged. "In this atmosphere, it is difficult not to discern that Minkow was subject to some form of intimidation, if not direct threats on his life," Kenner wrote. But the prosecution said Minkow's lies about Mafia manipulation during his nearly two weeks of testimony "are unparalleled in this courthouse." "Now that it is in his self-interest (after the jury expressed its total disbelief in his story) . . . Minkow conveniently admits in his pre-sentence report that he 'lied under oath during his trial.' He attempts to excuse these lies by claiming that this was 'the old Barry,' who needs constant approval and attention from others," the prosecution said, quoting from a U.S. Probation Department evaluation of Minkow. "We believe that. . . Minkow's newly discovered remorse and religion should be viewed with a strong and healthy sense of skepticism," prosecutors said.
19890328000000000	MINKOW GIVEN 25-YEAR TERM; 'ENJOYED' ROLE. Barry Minkow, who started the ZZZZ Best carpet cleaning company in his parents' garage and turned it into a fraudulent $100-million empire, was sentenced Monday to 25 years in prison after admitting he had "enjoyed being a little Mafioso." "Today is a great day for this country. The system works. . . . They got the right guy," Minkow, 23, said in a spirited speech to the judge that suggested the days when his fast-talking charm and ability to inspire people made him a millionaire. "I see victims here today," Minkow said, turning to a courtroom filled with investors who were among those who lost tens of millions of dollars when ZZZZ Best collapsed in July, 1987, amid allegations that the company's books were padded with phantom revenues. "I can only say how sorry I am. I am going to get what I got coming -- and I deserve every bit of it."  $26 Million in Restitution But U.S. District Judge Dickran Tevrizian, expressing doubts about Minkow's professions of remorse, imposed the prison term recommended by the prosecution and also ordered him to pay $26 million in restitution for his conviction on 57 counts of fraud and conspiracy. "I can't use the word that really describes what you're trying to level at me. El toro poo-poo, that's what I'm hearing. . . . I have to ask myself: Is he trying to clean my carpet, or what?" the judge said. "You're dangerous because you have this charisma, this gift of gab, this ability to communicate, but you have no conscience," he told Minkow. The 25-year prison term was one of the longest ever handed down in Los Angeles in a white-collar crime case. Minkow will become eligible for parole after serving one-third of the sentence. "We believe the sentence was appropriate," said Assistant U.S. Atty. Gordon Greenberg, who with co-prosecutor James R. Asperger obtained the convictions of Minkow and 11 ZZZZ Best associates. "Barry Minkow did it the good, old-fashioned way. He earned every day of it." In his 10-minute statement at the sentencing hearing, Minkow announced that, as proof of his genuine regret over his crimes, he will not appeal his Dec. 14 conviction. But his lawyer, David E. Kenner, said he will file a motion to seek reconsideration of the sentence. Minkow, described by prosecutors as one of the most significant white-collar criminals ever prosecuted in the West, started his company at age 15 and had many of his early business meetings in the late afternoon after school. His talkative charm and natural head for business convinced top-notch accountants, lawyers and investment bankers for more than two years that he had figured out a way to cheaply restore office buildings damaged by fire and flood, a business that was supposedly earning ZZZZ Best up to $43 million a year from insurance companies. ZZZZ Best also had a legitimate residential carpet cleaning enterprise -- eventually opening 21 offices in three states -- supported by television ads featuring Minkow confidently promising that his was the honest firm in a competitive field. Within a few years, Minkow, with the help of several more experienced business colleagues, transformed the private company into a public one and garnered nearly $13 million in a stock offering, obtained millions of dollars in loans from banks across America and talked dozens of private investors -- even some ZZZZ Best board members who did not know what he was up to -- to pledge their savings with the promise of huge profits. But, as it turned out, the majority of the lucrative restoration jobs never existed -- and neither did the revenues. Within days of Minkow's resignation in July of 1987, ZZZZ Best collapsed, leaving investors holding thousands of shares of worthless stock. The ZZZZ Best associates convicted in the case have received sentences ranging from 30 days to eight years in prison for various roles in helping Minkow carry out the fraud. Throughout his three-month trial in Los Angeles federal court, Minkow claimed he had been manipulated by mobsters and stock swindlers who had taken advantage of his youth and grabbed the hidden reins of power at his company, forcing him to lie to banks and investors to keep their profits coming in. He described being beaten until he coughed up blood and being accompanied constantly by huge thugs masquerading as bodyguards. But making his first public statements since his nearly two-week-long appearance on the witness stand, Minkow told the judge that he was really using the reputed mobsters with whom he was involved the same way he was using everyone else. "I've learned that it wasn't money that motivated me, as most people believe, but the attention, power and prestige the money brought me," Minkow said in a letter to the court. The "same" is true, he said, "for my relationship with organized crime figures. We used each other. . . . Barry Minkow enjoyed being a little Mafioso." When he got up to address the court, wearing jail issue blue trousers that were cuffed up to keep them from dragging on the ground, Minkow quickly became animated, waving his arms and, for a moment, holding the courtroom nearly spellbound. Minkow said he exemplified what he saw as the morality of his generation. "To me, winning meant everything -- everything, at all costs," he said. "Prestige, power and money. What else was there? And that's wrong. . . . The attitudes that made me fall and led me to do what I did, they're wrong. "If I took all these God-given talents that I had and used them, instead of for the bad, for the good, I'd never be here today. All the young entrepreneurs who said, 'I want to be like Barry Minkow.' Now they're saying, 'We can't get bank loans 'cause of Barry Minkow.' " The defense has said that Minkow does not have anything left of the $2.4 million to $3.3 million he earned while at the helm of ZZZZ Best. But Minkow pledged to use his business talents to pay investors back when he is released from prison. "Don't think for a second that I don't know to the penny how many people I hurt, how I'm going to work for the rest of my life to pay them back," he said. Tevrizian said Minkow brought more presence to the podium than some $500,000-a-year trial lawyers. But the judge said it was hard to take Minkow seriously when he admits he lied during his 11 days of testimony about mob beatings and threats from his own friends. "Every day he'd come into court and testify, and every day was at variance with the previous day," the judge said. "It was like a game show we were playing, a TV game show. Who could tell the biggest lie?" Asperger, who had recommended a sentence of at least 25 years, said Southern California has become the "Wild West" of white-collar crime and compared Minkow to such youthful offenders as Billy the Kid and Al Capone, who controlled rackets in Chicago by the age of 25. "He committed crimes on each and every day for more than five years. The nature of his crimes, I think, is mind-boggling," the federal prosecutor said. "His motive was simple: greed, and to become the biggest, richest and most famous entrepreneur ever." Tevrizian landed a final blow at Minkow when he jokingly referred to a Christmas card the young entrepreneur had sent to the prosecutors, who by then were midway through a rancorous, 3 1/2-month effort to send him to prison. Said the judge: "You sent the Christmas card to the wrong guy."
19890503000000000	BRIEFLY. Judge Won't Trim Sentence: A federal judge rejected a request to cut the eight-year sentence of self-styled financial adviser David Bloom, who admitted diverting $10 million of investors' money to fund a lavish life style. Bloom, 24, of Manhattan, is serving two consecutive four-year sentences at the Allenwood, Pa., federal prison camp after pleading guilty to one count each of mail fraud and securities fraud. He asked U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein to reduce the prison term because it was "harsh," compared to the sentences of other white-collar criminals and because Bloom is remorseful and undergoing psychological treatment. But Edelstein noted that Bloom's crime "involved cheating friends and colleagues," while other convicted white-collar thieves were charged with "crimes that, although they involved more money, involved fraud on the system, not particular individuals."
19890524000000000	'DON'T DO IT,' INSIDER LEVINE TELLS STUDENTS. Who can better describe the dangers of insider trading than -- well, an inside trader? That certainly was the reasoning Tuesday when Dennis B. Levine, the investment banker whose 1986 arrest for insider trading led to convictions of speculator Ivan F. Boesky and others, spoke of his criminal travails to UCLA graduate business students. Levine's message: Don't do it. "It's not worth it," Levine said of insider trading and other white-collar transgressions in an interview following his talk, which was closed to reporters. "And it's not just because of what happened to me. It's because of what happened to my family, the innocent victims." Levine's appearance was one of several speeches at colleges and universities he has given since he was released in last September after serving 18 months of a two-year sentence on four counts of securities fraud, tax evasion and perjury. Levine's talk to students of UCLA's John E. Anderson Graduate School of Business was his first at a West Coast institution. Levine said he hoped that describing his prison experience and the toll it took on his wife and two young children would deter ambitious business students from illegal or unethical practices. The former investment banker served the first few months of his sentence in a federal prison in Lewisburg, Pa., before being moved to a Manhattan halfway house. Several of the approximately 60 students in attendance said Levine described in his talk an emotional story of how he was unable to explain to his then 5-year-old son why he did what he did. "If the students can really understand and feel what's it's like (through my experiences), then my message will be effective," Levine said in the interview. Several students said the message got through. "It's not worth going through what he had to go through for the amount of money you can make" through insider trading, said Henry Brandon, a second-year business student. "We had discussions in class about ethics, but I never really talked to anybody found guilty," said David Peters, another second-year student. "So having a real-life issue and a real-life person discussing it (was) a great opportunity." Others, however, were not so impressed. "He operates on a functional level of morality where you don't do something because you don't want to get caught, not because it's wrong," said Julane Marx, a first-year business student. One student, David Strauss, objected to Levine's being invited in the first place. "He's a convicted felon and it's grossly inappropriate to be inviting someone like him out here under these circumstances," said Strauss, who read a letter protesting the event just before Levine's speech began. Levine, 36, was an executive in the mergers and acquisitions department at Drexel Burnham Lambert when he pleaded guilty in 1986 to making $12.6 million in illegal profits from insider trading.
19890928000000000	BILZERIAN GETS $1.5-MILLION FINE, 4-YEAR PRISON TERM. A federal judge Wednesday sentenced former Singer Co. Chairman Paul A. Bilzerian to four years in prison and a $1.5-million fine for the nine counts of securities and tax fraud on which he was convicted in June. U.S. District Judge Robert J. Ward said he was convinced that a prison sentence was warranted, even though Bilzerian had never before been convicted of a crime, because the former corporate raider had lied on the witness stand during his trial. "I recognize that he was a first (time) offender and he had a right to go to trial," the judge said. "But he did not have the right to take the stand and present false testimony." Bilzerian, 38, had been accused of illegally amassing millions in profits from failed raids in 1985 and 1986 on Cluett, Peabody & Co.; H. H. Roberts & Co., and Hammermill Paper Co. He was also accused of failing to disclose a large investment in Armco Inc. After six weeks of testimony, a jury convicted him on all the counts against him. The government had charged that Bilzerian evaded Securities and Exchange Commission disclosure requirements and had filed false tax returns. Bilzerian resigned as Singer's chairman within weeks after the conviction. In addition to the prison term and fine, the judge sentenced Bilzerian to two years of probation and 250 hours of community service. Bilzerian would be eligible for parole after serving 16 months.  'Depth of Despair' Judge Ward, however, allowed Bilzerian to remain free on bail pending the outcome of an appeal. The case was part of the series of criminal prosecutions that resulted from former stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky's cooperation with the government. During the sentencing, Bilzerian showed little emotion but at times listened with his eyes closed and occasionally stared down at the table in front of him. In a letter delivered to the judge some time before the sentencing, Bilzerian had written: "I hope you understand the depth of my despair. My trial and conviction has (sic) publicly humiliated me and I am sorry for any shame and sorrow I have caused my friends and family. I never intended to cause harm to anyone. I wish I could turn back the clock of time and correct whatever mistakes I may have made." Bilzerian's lawyer, Arthur Mathews, had argued that because his client had no previous criminal record he should be sentenced only to community service. Mathews suggested work in a drug treatment program for children near Bilzerian's home in Tampa, Fla. But prosecutors, in a document filed with the court, said Bilzerian had "displayed contempt for the legal system" and since his conviction had "displayed absolutely no contrition or remorse." During the trial, Bilzerian, who holds a degree from Harvard Business School, testified that he didn't know it was illegal for him not to have filed personal income tax returns for the years 1982, 1983 and 1984. He also denied that he had made illegal arrangements with the Los Angeles-based brokerage firm Jefferies & Co. to secretly hold stock for him in his raid on Hammermill. On Wednesday, Judge Ward said that a statement of Bilzerian's personal finances, filed with the court, stated that he has a net worth of $81.4 million.
19891011000000000	EMBEZZLER GETS 30-DAY TERM, FINE. A San Fernando Superior Court judge rejected a prosecutor's plea for a more stringent sentence Tuesday and ordered an insurance broker to spend 30 days in County Jail for embezzling clients' insurance premiums. Judge Malcolm Mackey also ordered Gary Martin, 53, of Tujunga to perform 300 hours of community service, imposed a $10,000 fine, ordered him to pay restitution to his victims and avoid working in a capacity in which he would be responsible for other people's money. A jury convicted Martin, president of Welmar Insurance Service, Sept. 18 of six felony charges for stealing about $23,000 from three clients who had paid him to buy auto insurance policies. The clients were left without insurance coverage. Deputy Dist. Atty. Steven J. Ipsen had urged that Martin be sentenced to two years in prison, but Mackey said the community would be better served if Martin worked and paid restitution. "Sending everyone to jail is not a panacea," Mackey said. "The punishment must fit the crime."  Failing Business Mackey described Martin, who used the money to pay the operating expenses of his ailing insurance company, as a small businessman who got in financial trouble and did not deserve to be punished as if he had set up a business deliberately to defraud people. But Ipsen said Martin, whose broker's license previously had been suspended for six months for misusing funds, got off too lightly. The prosecutor said the sentence reflects the court system's leniency toward white-collar criminals. "If they appear to be 'one of us' -- white, Anglo-Saxon, educated people -- it becomes difficult to send them to state prison," Ipsen said. "If it were someone not wearing a tie and not wearing a jacket who had stolen similar dollar amounts and shown a similar lack of remorse, there is no way he would have gotten probation."  No Criminal Record But the Los Angeles County Probation Department agreed with the judge's assessment. It had recommended that Martin not be sentenced to state prison, noting that he has no criminal record. After his conviction, Martin told a county probation officer that he was innocent. He said the theft was planned by his former partner, Clark Wells, who pleaded guilty to two charges of theft in 1987 and was sentenced to three years probation. Martin was arrested in June, 1987, after a San Fernando businessman tried to add a car to an insurance policy that Martin had been paid to buy. The insurance company notified the businessman that the policy had been canceled for non-payment.
19891029000000000	PENSION PLANS LOOTED AS SAFEGUARDS WEAKEN; FRAUD: DESPITE WARNINGS, ABOUT $4 BILLION IN RETIREMENT INCOME MAY HAVE BEEN TAKEN BY RACKETEERS.. When his wife fell gravely ill, George Hohol wanted to quit his job as a welder so he could get his pension money to pay her soaring medical bills. But she begged him to keep working so they would have health insurance. Hohol stayed on the job, but his health insurance was canceled a few months later without warning because his employer had stopped paying the premium. Then the paychecks started to bounce, and finally the company closed in late 1986. The worst was yet to come. When Hohol tried to get the $29,000 accumulated in his pension plan over 22 years, he got excuses and delays instead. Ultimately he learned the money was gone, lost in an elaborate fraud scheme by the owner and a lawyer for the small company, DuPage Boiler Works, in the Chicago suburb of Naperville. Hohol, a proud man who came to the United States from Poland after spending World War II in German labor camps, was $52,000 in debt and had been on unemployment for the first time in his life when his wife died in 1987. "My wife cried and cried because she hadn't let me quit before and get my money," Hohol said. "Her heart was broken, and I'm sure she died faster." Hohol and his wife were victims of what a federal official describes as "a new generation of racketeers" -- businessmen and lawyers who exploit weak government regulation to misuse and steal the retirement income of workers across the country. The U.S. Labor Department, according to its acting inspector general, has proved powerless to deter abuse or to bring the wrongdoers to justice. The inspector general estimates that $4 billion in pension funds are being misused, but in reality, no one knows how deep the problem is. "The nation's pension and welfare plans are vulnerable to fraud and corruption because of a flawed enforcement strategy adopted by the Labor Department that relies too much on civil remedies and not enough on criminal prosecution," said Raymond Maria, the acting inspector general. Most pension plans, the experts say, are run honestly. Most workers will find their money waiting for them when they retire. And many pension plans -- but by no means all -- are federally insured in case the money runs out. Most abuse is found among relatively small employers -- the same ones that are least likely to be covered by federal insurance. The wrongdoers include small business owners who can't resist dipping into pension funds, such as a California construction company where $227,000 in pension funds was used to run the business. And they include those who appear intent on looting the funds from the start, such as a New Mexico potash mine owner accused of siphoning off $9 million in worker retirement funds to pay personal debts and finance a lavish life style. The enormous size of today's pension funds makes them attractive targets for the unobserved and the unscrupulous. Assets in private pension funds tripled in the last 10 years to $1.7 trillion -- about $7,000 for every man, woman and child in the country. More than 76 million workers and retirees are covered by a pension plan. But internal government audits, interviews and court records raise questions about whether the federal government's ability to keep this vast pool of money safe for workers has kept pace with the mushrooming growth. Consider this statistic: The U.S. Labor Department agency responsible for monitoring the nation's 870,000 pension plans has only 260 auditors and investigators assigned to the task. They review fewer than 1% of the plans each year. The least attention goes to the most vulnerable plans, the small ones that are not supervised by the outside auditors and layers of lawyers hired by large corporations. Congress and the Labor Department inspector general's office, the internal watchdog that is supposed to make sure the department is doing its job, have issued repeated warnings about the inadequate resources. In 1986, a Senate committee concluded that inadequate staffing has dangerously compromised the department's ability to protect worker pensions. And earlier this year, a study of 168 plans by the inspector general's office uncovered $18.7 million in misused funds. At that rate, the office said, there would be $4-billion worth of fraud and abuse systemwide. Not long ago, the problem was far worse. Before Congress enacted the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) in 1974, only a minuscule 3% of workers received the full benefits to which they were entitled. The 1974 law put the Labor Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration in charge of monitoring pension plans. In 1978, when Jimmy Carter was President, the office conducted 8,598 reviews and investigations. By 1988, the figure had plummeted to 1,632 despite the threefold increase in pension-fund assets. A PWBA spokeswoman explained that the agency has undertaken larger, more sophisticated cases in recent years. "Our enforcement strategy is that quality is more important than quantity," she said. The agency concentrates on the largest 5% of the plans, which hold roughly 90% of pension assets. The 93% of the plans with fewer than 100 participants are least likely to be reviewed, and they are not required to hire outside auditors to ensure that the money is being handled legally. "Making sure $1.7 trillion is invested wisely for the workers and retirees is an impossible task," said Karen W. Ferguson, director of the Pension Rights Center, an advocacy group for workers based in Washington. "It is not the fact that the Labor Department is not doing its job, but the fact that it is an impossible job to do given their limited resources." Government regulators such as the Internal Revenue Service and the Securities and Exchange Commission try to maximize limited resources through criminal prosecutions that send a strong message of deterrence. But the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration relies almost entirely on civil and administrative sanctions. Of the PWBA's 5,000 investigations in the last three years, only 95 were classified as criminal and only 26 convictions resulted. Maria, the acting inspector general, contends this strategy reassures would-be pension pillagers: The worst that will happen, in the unlikely event they are caught, is likely to be a civil fine. Pension-fund regulation today, the inspector general's office and others argue, is comparable to the woeful monitoring that contributed to the collapse of the savings and loan industry, a debacle expected to cost taxpayers at least $150 billion. The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., which was set up by the 1974 ERISA law to insure workers' pensions, has a deficit of $4 billion -- the difference between what they owe pensioners and what they can expect to receive in the form of employer premiums. A big chunk of the $4 billion is a disputed $2.3 billion in pension obligations left by the 1986 bankruptcy of LTV Corp. Although the PBGC has gone to court against LTV in a fight over responsibility for making the pension payments, it has also been making the payments for the last three years. In 1987, for the first time, the PBGC paid out more money to cover pension obligations than it collected in employer premiums. The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, warned that the fund would be broke -- unable to meet its current obligations -- by 2001. Congress reacted by increasing the insurance premium paid by employers, now the sole source of revenue for the PBGC. But PBGC officials are still concerned about potential problems with under-funded pension plans in big industries, such as the airlines. The Labor Department's inspector general's office says a major shortfall could ultimately land in the taxpayers' laps, just as Congress turned to the taxpayers after another government insurance agency fell short of the funds it needed to pay insured depositors at failed S&Ls. Pension fund system representatives and some Labor Department officials say such concerns are exaggerated. "Generally, the private pension system is probably stronger than it has ever been," said Alan D. Lebowitz, deputy assistant secretary for operations at the PWBA. "People should not be overly concerned about the stability of the system or the integrity of the system." Nonetheless, the Labor Department recently informed Congress that it was considering tighter regulations on audits by outside accountants, one of the recommendations from the inspector general. Although he maintained that corruption has been restricted to a small number of pension plans, Lebowitz acknowledged: "I think they are highly vulnerable to abuse. Pension funds are pots of money sitting there to pay future benefits." Jeanette Kurns grew concerned in early 1986. Paychecks from DuPage Boiler Works, the company where her husband -- like George Hohol -- had worked for 22 years, were getting tough to cash. The local bank refused to honor them, and she had to be on the doorstep of the bank that issued the checks early in the morning to get them cashed before funds in the account ran out. For a half century, DuPage Boiler Works had run smoothly, if somewhat modestly. The work was steady, the overtime occasional. And if the hourly pay was less than other places, the workers were reminded every year that the company was setting money aside for them in a pension fund. But in October, 1984, the company had been sold to a man who identified himself as Robert Caldwell. He had big plans and built a fancy new office to go with them. He was driven to work in a limousine and gave the workers free turkeys the first Thanksgiving and again that Christmas. Only later would they discover that their pensions had probably financed that generosity. Within two weeks of taking over, Caldwell had begun raiding the profit-sharing account, according to court records. He had $350,000 transferred to another account and used some of the money to pay debts of another company he owned. Some of it went to such expenditures as a fur coat for himself and $45,000 worth of clothes for his wife, according to Joan B. Safford, a federal prosecutor in Chicago. Caldwell was actually Morton Scherl, a white-collar criminal with an arrest record dating to the mid-1960s in Los Angeles. When he bought DuPage Boiler, using the company's own money for the purchase, he was a fugitive wanted in New York, Massachusetts and Florida. By May, 1986, Scherl and William B. Goodstein, a Chicago lawyer, had wiped out DuPage Boiler's $741,000 profit-sharing account. About $35,000 had gone in small amounts to retiring workers to silence their complaints about not getting their pensions. The rest, court records show, went to Scherl and Goodstein and a variety of their businesses. In sucking the cash out of DuPage, Scherl had also stopped paying the utility bills or paying for raw material. And even though money was still being deducted from paychecks, he stopped paying withheld taxes to the IRS and cancelled the health insurance. For seven months in 1986, Jeanette Kurns tried to get someone to take a look at what was going on at DuPage. She wrote to President Ronald Reagan, the Labor Department, the IRS and various state agencies. She has a large blue binder filled with her futile correspondence and notes of her telephone conversations. "It was like a brick wall everywhere I turned, especially at the Labor Department in Washington," Kurns said. "The Department of Labor told me this was going on in such wide numbers that they didn't have enough investigators to go out and check." Wives of other workers also were urging the Labor Department to look into the problems, with similar results. Charles Lerner, the PWBA enforcement director, refused to comment directly on the DuPage Boiler case. But he said citizen complaints are one source for the agency's investigations of pension-fund problems. "We get thousands and thousands of phone calls," he explained. "The numbers are so huge." Eventually state authorities and the U.S. attorney's office began to investigate DuPage Boiler Works in the fall of 1986. That October, an IRS agent approached Scherl in the coffee shop of a Sheraton Hotel outside Chicago and told him he was under arrest. Scherl dashed through the hotel kitchen into the parking lot and fled. It was a year and a half before he was captured in Baltimore, where he was in the midst of another scheme. Scherl recently pleaded guilty in federal court in Chicago to misusing DuPage Boiler's pension funds and other charges and is awaiting sentencing. Goodstein, the lawyer, was convicted and sentenced to three years in prison. At Goodstein's trial, George Hohol and Jeanette Kurns were among several witnesses who testified about the financial hardship resulting from the pension fraud. Safford, a veteran prosecutor with a reputation for toughness, was so upset by Hohol's story that she left the courtroom to avoid crying in front of the jury. Witnesses also described their frustrations with the Labor Department, prompting the presiding judge, Charles P. Kocoras, to offer lawyers in the case his view on the department's response. "One of the witnesses said she called Washington and they told her not to worry about it," Kocoras said from the bench. "Here they are getting fleeced out of all of this money, and Washington is advising these people not to worry." The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. was established by the ERISA law to insure the pensions of workers and retirees. If employers do not provide enough money to cover promised benefits when a plan is ended, the agency will pay them up to a ceiling that is now set at $2,028 a month. However, the PBGC insures only what are called defined-benefit plans, which promise a specific monthly benefit at retirement. As a result, only 107,500 of the 870,000 pension plans are insured, although the covered plans represent 40 million workers and retirees out of the 76 million enrolled in pension plans. Defined-contribution plans, whose ultimate pension benefit is not predetermined, are not insured by the PBGC. Most common among these are profit-sharing plans, employee stock ownership plans and 401(k) savings plans. James B. Lockhart, executive director of the PBGC, said the percentage of workers covered by defined-benefit plans has declined steadily in the 1980s. More worrisome to Lockhart is the fact that most new pension plans are defined-contribution plans, which are not insured by the government. The DuPage Boiler Works profit-sharing plan was not insured. After the company closed its doors, a court-appointed trustee for the pension plan recovered enough during bankruptcy proceedings to pay workers about 80% of their pensions. But the faith of people like Jeanette Kurns was shaken badly. "You think that money is as safe as the money in your bank account," she said. Lerner, the PWBA enforcement director, said the agency has tried to cover more plans by focusing its enforcement on financial consultants who advise multiple plans and on financial institutions that hold the assets of many plans. But an examination of cases against consultants and financial businesses in recent years raises doubts about the agency's effectiveness in this arena. Last May, the department filed a civil lawsuit against the New York brokerage house Shearson Lehman Hutton, two smaller investment firms, three former brokers and several fund trustees. The defendants played a role in managing $560 million belonging to several Teamsters Union pension and welfare plans in Utica, N.Y. The suit, which is pending, charged that the plans lost money in a scheme in which the brokers bought stocks and placed them in a holding account for several days. Losing trades were assigned to pension-fund accounts and profitable trades went into the accounts of friends, relatives and other customers, including some plan trustees, the suit contends. But this was not a case of the Labor Department's ferreting out alleged wrongdoing. The lawsuit followed a 6-year-old criminal investigation by federal prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission, which had already led to guilty pleas by three brokers. The department was equally late in the case of Glen E. Dawson of Annapolis, Md., a former IRS auditor who invested funds for about 200 small pension funds and drove a Mercedes-Benz sports car bearing a license plate reading "ERISA." Dawson, who handled pension investments for doctors and accountants, promised high returns for the pension funds of the professionals and their employees. ERISA prohibits those responsible for pension money from accepting fees for investing the funds in a particular institution. But for several years, according to a lawsuit filed in Baltimore, Dawson invested pension-fund assets with companies that paid him substantial commissions and fees in return. One client, a Midwestern accountant, said he was questioned by a Labor Department investigator in 1983 about Dawson's operation. The accountant said he provided a sworn statement to a department lawyer that year but never heard anything further and kept using Dawson. Dawson stayed in business until outside events intervened. He was also chairman of a Baltimore savings and loan association, and the state seized the S&L in December, 1985, because it was insolvent. Court records show that the S&L had lent Dawson $105,000 and that he had invested pension-fund money in the thrift when it was struggling to survive what Maryland regulators charged was "gross mismanagement and plundering" by its officers, including Dawson. In August, 1986, the Labor Department filed a civil lawsuit accusing Dawson of violating ERISA. Court files indicate the pension plans operated by Dawson, which were uninsured, had lost up to $1 million in what the lawsuit called a pattern of unlawful transactions covering seven years and 130 plans. Last year, a federal judge banned Dawson from the pension business and ordered him to repay the plans a total of $70,000 in restitution. Dawson had filed for bankruptcy earlier, and a lawyer in the case said $70,000 was about all he had left by the time the Labor Department got to him. FLORIDA RESTAURANT LOAN SCHEME GOES SOUR. Law enforcement authorities say pension-fund officials who have little loyalty to their members are especially vulnerable to the sort of approach that Florida businessman Leonard J. Mercer Jr. used on his friend, Joseph J. Higgins. Mercer, a Ft. Lauderdale hotel owner, told Higgins that he needed $375,000 to purchase the Ta-Boo, a Palm Beach restaurant. Higgins had access to that much money and more. He had been retained by New Jersey Teamsters Local 701 to invest $20 million worth of union pension funds in residential and commercial loans. But Higgins told Mercer that union rules, which were designed to protect members, restricted how Higgins' company, Omni Funding Group Inc., could invest the Teamsters' pension funds. In particular, no funds could be placed in high-risk ventures such as bars, restaurants and bowling alleys. According to federal court records, Mercer then devised a scheme for Omni Funding to advance him the money under the guise that it would be used to refinance his hotel. Omni provided the loan and submitted false reports about it to the Teamsters local, which forwarded them to the U.S. Labor Department. In return, Mercer paid $42,500 in kickbacks to Higgins in the form of cash, free hotel suites, meals and other gifts. Reporting false information about pension-fund loans is a violation of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, which Congress passed in 1974 to tighten up supervision over pension funds. Acting on an insider's tip, the Labor Department's Office of Labor Racketeering, in conjunction with the U.S. attorney's office in Miami, launched a criminal investigation into Mercer and Higgins that led to guilty pleas by both men and their eventual imprisonment. Mercer pleaded guilty to kickback charges as well as perjury for lying to a federal grand jury when he testified that Higgins had paid for his stays at Galt Ocean Mile Hotel, which Mercer owned. Identified by the Pennsylvania Crime Commission as a longtime associate of Philadelphia mob figures, Mercer received four years in prison and a $40,000 fine. In a separate court appearance, Higgins pleaded guilty to perjury, wire fraud and mail fraud and was sentenced to eight years in prison. Two trustees and two lawyers for the Teamsters' New Jersey pension fund also were eventually implicated in similar corrupt dealings with Higgins. One of those implicated pleaded guilty and the other three were convicted of racketeering and mail fraud. And nothing worked out for Mercer. Before he went off to jail last spring, his hotel and restaurant went bankrupt.
19891213000000000	LEONA HELMSLEY GETS 4 YEARS AND $7-MILLION FINE. Leona Helmsley, the self-proclaimed queen of a luxury hotel chain, was sentenced Tuesday to four years in federal prison and fined $7.1 million by a judge who said her criminal tax offenses were the product of "naked greed." The judge imposed the sentence after Helmsley, 69, tearfully begged for mercy. U.S. District Judge John M. Walker Jr. told Helmsley that she had "an arrogant belief that she was above the law." He noted that her crime wasn't motivated by financial need and said that, since her conviction, she had shown no remorse. Helmsley and two employees were convicted in August on 33 felony counts related to evasion of $1.2 million in federal income taxes, including Helmsley's diversion of funds from the real estate and hotel companies that she and her husband controlled in order to pay for lavish personal expenditures. Helmsley's trial drew intense media interest. She became a symbol of upper-class abuse of privilege when a former housekeeper testified that Mrs. Helmsley had once snapped at her: "We don't pay taxes; the little people pay taxes." In addition, Walker sentenced Helmsley to three years of probation, including 750 hours of community service at Hale House, a home for infants born addicted to drugs. The judge ordered her to pay the federal taxes she owes, plus penalties and interest, and $469,000 in New York state taxes. The judge allowed her to remain free on bail pending an appeal, with the amount of bail to be determined later. Should her appeals fail and she be sent to prison, she would be eligible for parole after serving a year and three months. As she and her husband, Harry, 80, left the courthouse Tuesday, members of a crowd that had gathered outside shouted "Whore!" "The queen is dead!" and "Bitch, you should have got a thousand years!" Attracted by what promised to be one of the great courtroom scenes of the year, scores of would-be spectators had stood in line for over an hour to get inside. Mrs. Helmsley, renowned from magazine ads in which she appeared as the perfectionist queen of the Helmsley Hotels chain, attended court in a long-sleeved black mock turtleneck dress with a drop waist and loose pleats. When the judge asked her if she had anything to say, she stood but had trouble getting her words out because of sobs. She said: "I'm more humiliated and shamed than anybody could ever imagine that I have been found guilty of a serious crime." Helmsley said that, because of the case's extensive publicity, she and her husband had been virtual prisoners in their home for three years, unable to leave because they might be attacked or jeered. She said her life was "a nightmare." She referred to her continuing grief for her son, who died in 1982, and then spoke of Harry, who has been judged mentally incompetent and whom she has been taking care of. "I beg you, please don't let me lose Harry too," Helmsley said. "Our whole life has been work and each other. We have nothing else." She ended her statement by saying: "I'm sorry. I'm sorry." Harry Helmsley, the founder of a New York real estate and hotel empire estimated to be worth $5 billion, had been indicted along with his wife. But he was later judged unfit to stand trial because of failing memory and didn't appear at all in court during the trial. Harry Helmsley attended Tuesday's sentencing flanked by three bodyguards. He appeared thoughtful and attentive. But afterward he showed no sign of having fully understood the proceedings. When a friend offered support and told him soothingly that his wife was unlikely to begin her sentence "for years and years," until the appeals process is exhausted, Helmsley laughed and repeated "years and years." After the sentencing, Mrs. Helmsley turned to friends in the courtroom, including television personality Barbara Walters, and said: "See what they've done to me?" Helmsley's attorney, Gerald Feffer, acknowledged that she deserved to be punished for her crimes. But he noted in court that his client will soon turn 70 and said she has already been severely punished by the humiliation and abuse she has suffered at the hands of the press and public. Feffer said Helmsley had received death threats, as well as voluminous hate mail, much of it obscene and anti-Semitic. He said her position and notoriety mean that she would be a target of physical abuse in prison. Feffer had asked the judge to sentence her to perform community service at Hale House. Feffer told the judge that, if he felt that punishment wasn't severe enough, he could also sentence Helmsley to live in Harlem, in one of Hale House's residential facilities for mothers recovering from addiction. This, Feffer said, would place her in "an environment that will humble her on a daily basis." When he pronounced sentence, Judge Walker said that in making up his mind he had focused only on her crimes, ignoring Helmsley's "vilification" in the press, as well as testimony that she was sometimes cold-hearted and vindictive in her treatment of employees. In addition to paying for renovation of the 28-room Helmsley mansion in Greenwich, Conn., company funds were used by Mrs. Helmsley to pay for a new swimming pool and a $130,000 indoor/outdoor stereo system at the estate. According to testimony in the trial, she used company funds to pay credit card bills for underwear and other clothing from department stores, a $45,000 silver clock specially designed in the shape of the Helmsley Building in New York, and a leg waxing. The Helmsleys failed to disclose the money as personal income, as tax laws require. The trial included testimony about her blithely firing household employees at Christmastime for petty infractions and demanding cash kickbacks from firms that supplied liquor to the Helmsley hotels. But, in arguing for a lenient sentence, her lawyer presented letters from several other Helmsley employees for whom Mrs. Helmsley had gone out of her way to assure adequate medical treatment, including two who had AIDS. Helmsley, born Leona Mindy Rosenthal, came from a modest background, the daughter of a Brooklyn hat maker. She had had several careers before she met and married Harry Helmsley, including being a showroom model, cigarette vendor and, later, a successful Manhattan real estate broker. It was a second marriage for both. Both Mrs. Helmsley and her husband still face similar tax charges in New York state court. They have pleaded not guilty, and a ruling is expected on whether Harry Helmsley is mentally competent to stand trial on the state charges. Several Helmsley hotels in New York face loss of their liquor licenses because of Mrs. Helmsley's felony conviction. State action on the subject is pending. Judge Walker told the defendants that their attempts to cheat the government "undermines the system of voluntary compliance" on which the nation's tax system depends. He said that the sentences should send a message to anyone thinking of falsifying a tax return that, "if you do it and you're caught, you will go to prison." The two employees who had been convicted with her also were sentenced Tuesday to prison terms and fines. They were convicted of helping Mrs. Helmsley cheat the government through false tax returns, although the wrongdoing resulted in little direct financial gain to the employees. Joseph V. Licari, 53, the chief financial officer of Helmsley Enterprises Inc., was sentenced to 30 months in prison, three years of probation and a $75,000 fine. Frank J. Turco, 47, who was vice president and chief of financial services for Helmsley Hotels Inc., was sentenced to 24 months in prison, three years of probation and a $50,000 fine. Their lawyers said they don't intend to appeal, and the two are to begin their sentences on Jan. 16. Turco has already pleaded guilty to state charges, and Licari is expected to do so today.
19900107000000000	WILL WALL ST.'S NEW COP KEEP HEAT ON FRAUD?; SECURITIES: U.S. ATTORNEY OTTO G. OBERMAIER HAS DOUBTS ABOUT USING RICO IN INVESTMENT FRAUD CASES. AND HE HAS REPRESENTED WHITE-COLLAR DEFENDANTS HIMSELF.. Otto G. Obermaier, the new U.S. attorney in Manhattan, bristles at suggestions that his appointment will mark a letup in the 4-year-old crackdown on Wall Street fraud. Before a reporter can even finish asking him what his new reign will mean for criminal prosecution of insider trading and securities fraud, Obermaier, 53, jumps in: "Nothing. It means nothing." Obermaier is filling the shoes of Rudolph W. Giuliani, a zealous and publicity-hungry prosecutor who launched an unprecedented wave of criminal cases against major Wall Street figures before he stepped down last year to make a losing run at becoming New York City's mayor. Giuliani won praise for bringing law enforcement into an area that had become corrupt and for raising the standards of conduct on Wall Street. But by the end of his five-year tenure, Giuliani was also reviled by interests as diverse as the conservative Wall Street Journal editorial page and the American Civil Liberties Union. The accusations included making promiscuous use of the harsh racketeering law, known as RICO, bringing criminal charges for offenses that previously had been handled only under civil law and ordering highly publicized arrests even though his office wasn't fully prepared to bring a case. Obermaier, by contrast, is regarded as a thoughtful, intellectual lawyer without political ambitions, described by one friend as more a diplomat than a crusader. He comes to the job after 19 years in private practice, much of it spent representing the type of white-collar defendants he now must prosecute. He is on record criticizing the use of RICO -- the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act -- in securities fraud cases. In published articles, he has expressed doubts about whether insider trading cases should be prosecuted as criminal offenses. And his appointee to head the criminal division in his office, Gerard E. Lynch, 38, a former Columbia University law professor, was one of the most prominent scholarly critics of RICO, particularly its use in white-collar crime cases. Despite Obermaier's long tenure as a defense lawyer, current and former prosecutors praise him as a first-rate lawyer and say they don't doubt his commitment to tough prosecution. They note that, before he went into private practice in 1970, he was the chief trial lawyer in the Securities and Exchange Commission's New York office, and before that he was an assistant U.S. attorney. Nevertheless, many white-collar defense attorneys and other legal authorities in New York say they expect a change in approach under Obermaier. They expect more thoughtful consideration of specific charges before an indictment is brought. They also say it is probable that there won't be any flashy arrests designed for television cameras and that leaks about pending investigations may be less likely. John C. Coffee Jr., a Columbia law professor and friend of Obermaier's, said he expects that under Obermaier there will be "a greater willingness to recognize that some kinds of misconduct are best dealt with through injunctions and civil penalties" rather than criminal indictments. Giuliani was widely criticized for bringing major felony charges against individuals who some claimed were guilty only of marginal infractions, and Coffee says that under Obermaier this may be less likely. But he predicts that Obermaier's term won't bring any relief for big-league crooks. Referring to former stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky and former investment banker Dennis B. Levine, both of whom pleaded guilty to insider trading-related charges, Coffee says: "I have no doubt that if you catch a new Boesky tomorrow, or a new Dennis Levine, he would indict them in a moment." Obermaier himself, as the man whose many duties include being the top federal cop on Wall Street, asserts that he is, in fact, contemplating no big changes at all. In an interview, Obermaier seems slightly ill at ease and reveals little about himself. He says that his office, the second-largest U.S. Attorney's Office in the country after the District of Columbia's, is a "proud institution." He adds: "One doesn't come into an institution and make dramatic changes." Asked what his personal priorities are as U.S. attorney, Obermaier asserts: "I don't have any." Obermaier also declines to respond in any detail to the main criticism of him as U.S. attorney -- the fact that his old law firm, Obermaier, Morvillo & Abramovitz, represented so many prominent defendants in matters under investigation by the U.S. Attorney's Office that he will have to "recuse" himself from a long list of cases -- that is, disqualify himself from having anything to do with them and turn supervision over to a subordinate. These include some of the office's biggest pending prosecutions. It was because of this that Giuliani initially opposed Obermaier's nomination. Obermaier maintains that the recusals won't have any impact at all on how cases are managed. But the impact is unclear because Obermaier refuses to disclose how many cases he has recused himself from. A spokeswoman said: "It's not something he chooses to make available." It is known that Obermaier has disqualified himself from the big case pending against former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. junk bond chief Michael Milken, as well as from the pending real estate racketeering case against Imelda Marcos, wife of the late former Philippines president. One of his law partners had represented her co-defendant, Adnan M. Kashoggi. Obermaier himself for a time represented John A. Mulheren, who is due to go on trial soon on criminal securities fraud charges. Pete Romatowski, a Washington securities lawyer who spent six years as an assistant federal prosecutor in New York, says Obermaier's recusals inevitably will hurt. Romatowski praises Obermaier but said the recusals mean he won't be able to have final say on which charges are brought, or negotiate plea agreements. "It's going to be a handicap," Romatowski said. "The public interest would be better served if Otto were in a position to participate." Most of the cases from which Obermaier has disqualified himself apparently will be supervised by Roger S. Hayes, who joined the office in November as chief deputy U.S. attorney after serving as a state court judge. Before he was a judge, Hayes worked in the Manhattan district attorney's office, and he served for a time as head of the trial division. But his only experience in the federal system was during law school, when he worked as a student intern in the U.S. attorney's office in 1967. Knowledgeable sources said Hayes was given his new high-ranking job because his long association with the office of Manhattan District Atty. Robert Morgenthau will help Obermaier avoid turf battles with the city prosecutor. Such disputes had plagued the Giuliani years. Although Obermaier insists that he intends to change nothing about the office, at least one difference is already apparent. Obermaier has made clear that he has little interest in cultivating the press. Whereas Giuliani at times held two press conferences a day as U.S. attorney, Obermaier, who took office more than two months ago, has held none. Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, says of Obermaier: "I don't see early on the same sort of taste for splashy stuff that Giuliani displayed almost from the beginning." Both Obermaier and Morvillo, his former partner, are on record challenging aspects of RICO, including the financial forfeiture provision, which they have suggested gives prosecutors too much power. And Obermaier, in a column on white-collar crime that appeared in the New York Law Journal in 1986, openly questioned the filing of criminal charges in some insider trading cases; he seemed to indicate that he wasn't personally convinced that insider trading should be considered a crime. Although he didn't take an explicit stand in the article, he noted that "insider trading is unique among crimes . . . in that responsible and respected scholarly opinions are held that it has no harmful effects on the securities markets." Obermaier asserts that whatever views he may have expressed earlier won't have any effect on how cases are handled. But on RICO, he does allow that "I think that every thinking person probably believes that the statute is a little bit on the broad side." The RICO controversy came to the fore in the Giuliani years because of its use in the case against Drexel Burnham and in a related case against a much smaller securities firm, Princeton/Newport Limited Partners. In the Princeton/Newport case, criticism centered on whether the racketeering law, originally enacted by Congress as a means of fighting organized crime, should be applied to what Giuliani's critics contended were only relatively minor tax law violations. In the Drexel case, some legal authorities raised the issue of whether the pretrial forfeiture of assets allowed under RICO forced the firm to settle the charges by pleading guilty to six criminal charges rather than by trying to exonerate itself in a trial. RICO, they charged, was being used as a bludgeon to force a company to plead guilty, since the forfeiture provision meant that the firm might go out of business even before a trial could be held. In the Princeton/Newport case, six defendants were ultimately convicted of racketeering offenses for temporarily transferring the ownership of stocks and bonds to claim illegal tax benefits. As it happened, Obermaier's firm represented one of the defendants. Princeton/Newport did go out of business before a trial was held. Defense lawyers attributed this to the fact that prosecutors were able to freeze much of the firm's assets under RICO. But prosecutors received what was widely viewed as a sharp de facto rebuke when the judge who presided over the case sentenced the defendants to just a few months in prison and ruled that four of the defendants wouldn't have to forfeit any of their salary or profits from the partnership. This was in contrast with the lengthy sentences and heavy financial forfeiture permitted under RICO. The judge found that given the relatively minor nature of the offenses, anything harsher would have amounted to cruel and unusual punishment. Lynch, the new head of the criminal division, in a lengthy law review article published in 1987, challenged recent uses of RICO. In the article, titled "RICO: The Crime of Being a Criminal," one of his main criticisms was that the law could be interpreted so broadly that even minor offenses could be considered a pattern of racketeering activity. "Within the white-collar area, virtually any securities fraud or mail fraud case can be made as a RICO case," Lynch said in an interview. "There's nothing that prevents you from using it in fairly trivial, run-of-the-mill cases." But Lynch also said that his criticisms were based mainly on academic concerns and that, if anything, he has to be on guard against a personal bias against white-collar criminals. He also said it would be wrong to assume that, as a prosecutor, he won't make use of every available tool, including RICO. "It would be wrong to think that anybody, including me or Otto, is going in there with the attitude that we're going to do something different with RICO," Lynch said. Meanwhile, outward appearances indicate that the pace of major securities fraud indictments has slackened considerably since the heady days of 1987 and 1988. Then, using information obtained from Boesky, Giuliani and his staff brought charges against former Los Angeles brokerage chief Boyd L. Jefferies, investment banker Martin A. Siegel, corporate raider Paul A. Bilzerian, GAF Corp., Drexel and a slew of others. Lynch says that more than anything else, the pace of prosecutions has and will depend on what wrongdoing rank-and-file prosecutors stumble onto. As mandated last year by Congress, the U.S. attorney's securities fraud unit will soon receive several additional assistant prosecutors. For his part, Alan Cohen, head of the unit, said: "Whatever the numbers show, the fact is that we are investigating and prosecuting criminal activity in the securities and commodities markets as vigorously as we ever have."  Obermaier and his former partner are on record challenging aspects of RICO, including the financial forfeiture provision, which they have suggested gives prosecutors too much power. And Obermaier has openly questioned the filing of criminal charges in some insider trading cases.
19900131000000000	SAN DIEGO COUNTY DIGEST: SAN DIEGO. A San Diego man was sentenced to 15 months in prison Monday for helping his bosses swindle $6 million from investors who bought old coins from an Orange County business. Brian Thompson, 28, formerly of Orange, had pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud stemming from his activities as sales administrator of the now-defunct Marco Numismatics, which operated in Costa Mesa from 1985 to 1988, said Assistant U.S. Atty. Thomas J. Umberg. Besides the prison term, U.S. District Judge J. Spencer Letts, sitting in Santa Ana, ordered Thompson to pay $7,000 restitution, Umberg said. The sentencing ends a case that saw seven men found guilty of federal crimes linked to the scam. Some were convicted at trial; others pleaded guilty. The father-son team that ran the business, Vincent L. Caterino, 59, of Riverside and James N. Caterino, 29, of Costa Mesa, were sentenced to prison this month for masterminding the high-pressure phone sales operation. They were convicted of conspiracy, mail fraud and wire fraud. Salesmen persuaded investors to buy rare or old coins that were vastly overvalued.
19900214000000000	2 OWNERS OF FAILED S&L GET STIFF SENTENCES. Two Orange County businessmen convicted of causing the collapse of Ramona Savings & Loan in Santa Ana received severe prison sentences Tuesday in federal court in Los Angeles and were ordered to pay millions of dollars in restitution to the government. Donald P. Mangano Sr., 53, of Huntington Beach, was sentenced to 15 years in prison, and John L. Molinaro, 49, of San Jose, received a 12-year sentence on charges of fraud and conspiracy that led to the thrift's 1986 collapse. They were also ordered to pay $6.8 million in restitution to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. The two men were convicted in October on more than 30 counts of bank fraud and conspiracy. "There is an element in this whole thing of cynicism and ruthlessness and deceit," said U.S. District Court Judge David V. Kenyon in announcing the sentences. Neither man showed any reaction as Kenyon read the sentences. Molinaro, dressed in a wrinkled blue work shirt and prison fatigues, leaned back in his chair. Mangano looked down at a note pad. The men will be eligible for parole in four to five years. The prosecution said it was pleased with Kenyon's decision. "We regard this as a significant victory for the government in its efforts to punish those responsible for the savings and loan crisis," said Asst. U.S. Attorney Steven E. Zipperstein. "The sentence will send a message to other savings and loan owners that white-collar crime doesn't pay." Defense attorneys expressed little surprise at the length of the sentences, claiming that Kenyon was under pressure from regulators to set an example. Kenyon had received letters from the nation's top banking regulators, including FDIC Chairman L. William Seidman, appealing for long prison terms for both men. The Ramona case has attracted a great deal of attention because Molinaro and Mangano were the first owners of a failed thrift in Southern California to face criminal charges since the nation's thrift debacle began to unfold in the late 1980s. The 2 1/2-hour sentencing proceeding became rather delicate when the subject became Mangano's deteriorating health. He is a quadriplegic -- the victim of a bout with polio more than 30 years ago -- and his attorneys have claimed that any kind of incarceration could result in his death. Mangano's attorneys pleaded with Kenyon on Tuesday to place him on probation.
19900307000000000	J. DAVID EXECUTIVE GETS 10-YEAR TERM FOR EVADING TAXES. Nancy Hoover Hunter, convicted of four counts of tax evasion in connection with the J. David & Co. investment fraud, was sentenced Tuesday to 10 years in federal prison. Hunter, 51, a former top executive with the failed La Jolla investment firm, begged U.S. District Judge Earl B. Gilliam for mercy, crying and holding on to a lectern for support as she said she was "terribly sorry for all the pain and suffering I've caused." Hunter's attorneys had pleaded with Gilliam to view her conviction apart from the complicated J. David fraud, which bilked about 1,500 investors of about $80 million from 1979 to 1984. But Gilliam said the case was "a little more than an income-tax violation case." The judge added, "We have in this case the motive, the extravagance and, uppermost, the people who were hurt." Gilliam, who could have sentenced Hunter to 20 years in prison, added a five-year probation term after the 10-year prison sentence concludes. But he did not impose a fine. The judge said he was not ready to consider when Hunter would be eligible for parole. The giant J. David fraud involved a Ponzi scheme in which money from new investors was used to pay off old investors and little actual trading was done. Prosecutors allege that Hunter created false documents to lure investors to J. David and then to lull them into staying put while the firm slid toward a bankruptcy that was declared in February, 1984. Hunter's former lover, firm founder J. David (Jerry) Dominelli, pleaded guilty in 1985 to fraud and tax evasion in connection with the scheme and is serving a 20-year sentence in federal prison. A jury convicted Hunter Dec. 11 of the four tax counts -- out of 197 total charges. It acquitted her of one other tax charge but deadlocked on 192 other counts, primarily fraud and conspiracy stemming from her role at J. David. The tax charges involved nearly $2 million that Hunter failed to report on her personal income taxes for the years 1980 through 1983, evading nearly $1 million in taxes. At the trial, Hunter said Dominelli had assured her he would take care of any tax. Prosecutors have said they intend to go to trial again on the 192 counts. A May 1 trial date has been set. When the second trial ends, Hunter faces yet another trial on securities violations connected to the J. David case.
19900330000000000	MCKINZIE GUILTY OF LOOTING S&L; FRAUD: FAIRY TALE ENDS AS JURY CONVICTS EX-NORTH AMERICA OFFICIAL ON RACKETEERING AND CONSPIRACY CHARGES. COLLAPSE OF HER INSTITUTION COST TAXPAYERS $120 MILLION.. Janet Faye McKinzie was convicted Thursday of looting the now-defunct North America Savings & Loan, ending what had once been a fairy tale existence of Rolls-Royces, $1,000 cocktail dresses and lavish parties with entertainment provided by the likes of Sammy Davis Jr. A jury of six men and six women deliberated eight days in U.S. District Court before finding McKinzie guilty of 22 of 26 counts including racketeering, conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property. She faces up to 175 years in jail. McKinzie, 40, wept as the verdict was read. During the eight-week trial, defense attorney Richard (Racehorse) Haynes portrayed McKinzie as a helpless victim duped into carrying out the fraud because she was being pumped full of prescription drugs by the thrift's chairman, Duayne Christensen. Christensen mysteriously died in a car accident only nine hours before federal regulators took over the thrift in 1987. The former dentist was named an unindicted co-conspirator in McKinzie's case. Federal prosecutors had portrayed the couple as a modern-day Bonnie and Clyde, stealing millions of dollars from North America to enrich themselves. They each had a Rolls-Royce -- hers with the license plate XTACI. And McKinzie spent hundreds of thousands of dollars at Neiman-Marcus, much of it after regular store hours as a preferred customer. FBI agents found that the pair had spent $125,000 on a gold eagle statue, $18,500 on a letter opener and $500 on a gold paper clip. McKinzie's 37th birthday in 1986 was celebrated with a dinner for hundreds of guests at the Newport Beach Marriott. Sammy Davis Jr. was on hand to sing a mix of tunes including "Happy Birthday." McKinzie officially was a consultant to North America. She was also Christensen's business manager and confidante. Prosecutors, however, say she was the thrift's de facto chairman. The collapse of North America, one of several Orange County thrifts to fail in recent years, eventually cost taxpayers more than $120 million. Thursday's verdict was hailed by regulators. "The North America case was probably one of the top three investigations in the last five years in terms of how egregious the fraud was," said William Davis, chief deputy of the California Department of Savings and Loan. "Justice finally prevailed. I'm delighted." McKinzie is the first person to be convicted under the RICO statute -- the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act -- in connection with a savings and loan failure on the West Coast. Federal prosecutors employed the RICO statute so the government could try to claim the proceeds from Christensen's $10-million life insurance policy, which named McKinzie as sole beneficiary. The jury in the McKinzie case is scheduled to reconvene next month to decide if she must forfeit that money to the U.S. Treasury Department. The money is currently being held in a government-controlled escrow account. Because the jury still has some unfinished business, both prosecutors and defense attorneys were reluctant to say much Thursday. Assistant U.S. Attys. David J. Schindler and Paul L. Seave would only say they were pleased with the verdict. Michael M. Essmyer -- Haynes' co-counsel -- expressed disappointment. "Ms. McKinzie's judgment was impaired by the prescription drugs to the extent that under the law she should have been found not guilty," Essmyer said. McKinzie had pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity, a highly unusual plea in a white-collar-crime case. Haynes, one of the nation's leading defense attorneys, repeatedly told jurors that McKinzie was "a washed-out zombie" simply following Christensen's orders. Hundreds of prescriptions were introduced as evidence, indicating that McKinzie was taking massive doses of drugs that included anti-anxiety medications such as Xanax. During closing arguments two weeks ago, Haynes said Christensen was the Jim Jones of the savings and loan industry, a reference to the cult religious figure who led 900 of his followers in a mass suicide in Guyana. The defense even showed jurors pictures of McKinzie before and after her relationship with Christensen. The first photo shows her svelte and healthy. In the second, McKinzie appears emaciated and pale. "The smiling, charming blonde had become an 89- to 93-pound, prescription-drug-addicted, mentally diminished person who almost died in February, 1987," Essmyer told jurors. McKinzie didn't even drink coffee before she met Christensen, Essmyer said. Essmyer paraphrased Christensen as saying: "Just help me a little bit. It's my money, it's my savings and loan. And here, have a few pills." Christensen died in 1987 when his Jaguar crashed into an overpass piling on the Corona del Mar Freeway. He was 57. The Orange County coroner classified the cause of his death as undetermined, failing to rule on whether it was an accident or suicide. Jurors sided with the government, which said McKinzie was fully aware of what she was doing. Federal prosecutors focused exclusively during the trial on two schemes that they claimed McKinzie directed personally. According to the prosecution, an escrow-accounts fraud succeeded in bilking North America of $11 million between August, 1985, and March, 1986. The thrift's board of directors approved the deposit of millions of dollars in what they thought were escrow accounts to be used by McKinzie to purchase properties with the help of a real estate speculator named David L. Morgan. The escrow accounts were phony. McKinzie went so far as to order an underling to get blank stationery from the two banks where the deposits were supposedly held. Shortly thereafter, North America executives received letters that appeared to be from the banks reassuring them that the deposits were safe and sound. "To give all parties concerned a good comfort zone, prior to any of these funds being released, North America Savings will be immediately notified," one letter said. The letters were forgeries -- done at McKinzie's instruction -- and the $11 million was long gone by the time they arrived in North America's mailbox. "The money was dispersed to the four corners of the Earth," Seave said during closing arguments. One letter -- purportedly written by the manager of one of the two banks -- even praised McKinzie. "I can assure you Jan McKinzie, her Plaza Group reputation and the business she provides to our bank is well respected," the letter said. "That was very nice of Jan McKinzie to write that about herself," Seave said during closing arguments. "A nice self-serving touch." The second scam McKinzie engineered, jurors were told, involved two residential projects that North America was financing. Using old invoices from those projects, McKinzie instructed secretaries to white-out key information, such as dates and amount paid, and put in new information including much larger amounts due. North America wrote $5.6 million worth of checks based on those phony invoices, some of which went directly to McKinzie and Christensen. The two even formed a shell company called Central State Construction which was used as a funnel for some of the ill-gotten gains, the prosecution said. "These schemes are not complicated," Seave told jurors. "They just required a lot of hard work, and Janet McKinzie was a very hard worker." McKinzie -- along with several other officers and directors at North America -- still faces a civil lawsuit brought by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. FSLIC attorney Eric Isken said the agency has no plans to drop its action. "We have always intended to pursue all remedies against Janet McKinzie," Isken said. "We intend to continue to purse that vigorously." The failure of North America was one of the more unusual of a series of savings and loan collapses in Orange County in the 1980s. Just last month, two Orange County businessmen were sentenced after convictions of fraud and conspiracy that led to the 1986 collapse of Ramona Savings & Loan in Santa Ana. They received prison terms of 27 years between them and were ordered to pay $6.8 million in restitution to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. And numerous criminal and civil investigations are under way involving Irvine-based Lincoln Savings & Loan. The thrift, which undertook risky real estate investments, was seized in April by federal regulators and is expected to cost taxpayers more than $2 billion. THE SAGA OF NORTH AMERICA SAVINGS & LOAN September, 1983: Duayne D. Christensen, a Westminster dentist, invests $6.4 million to open North America Savings & Loan in Huntington Beach. November, 1986: North America, now based in Santa Ana, loses $8.9 million for the first 11 months of 1986 and has a negative net worth of $1.5 million by the end of November. January, 1987: Christensen is killed when his car crashes into a bridge support on the Corona del Mar Freeway. Nine and a half hours later, North America is declared insolvent by state regulators. When evidence of widespread fraud is detected, the state turns the institution over to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., and the FBI and the state attorney general's office begin criminal investigations. Charles Bottomley is hired by the FSLIC to manage the thrift. February, 1987: Federal regulators sue Janet Faye McKinzie, Christensen's business manager and executive consultant, charging that she and Christensen defrauded the institution of more than $20 million and caused its collapse. March, 1987: Lawyers for federal regulators operating the thrift revise the amount missing to $40 million. December, 1987: After moving to new offices in Costa Mesa, North America puts its art and collectibles up for auction. Regulators estimate the thrift paid more than $250,000 for the office decorations. June, 1988: Federal regulators announce that they will close and liquidate North America. The failure is estimated to cost taxpayers $120 million. April, 1989: A federal grand jury in Los Angeles returns a 40-count racketeering indictment against McKinzie and five other former principals of the savings and loan, alleging that they looted the institution of more than $16 million. November, 1989-January, 1990: Three of McKinzie's associates plead guilty to criminal charges in connection with alleged fraud at North America. Jan. 9, 1990: Federal racketeering and bank fraud trial of McKinzie begins in Santa Ana. March 29, 1990: McKinzie is found guilty of 22 counts of racketeering, conspiracy, wire and bank fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property. She could be sentenced to up to 175 years in prison. Source: Los Angeles Times files
19900406000000000	HELMSLEY ASKS THE STATE TO DROP TAX EVASION CHARGES. A lawyer for Leona Helmsley urged a judge Thursday to dismiss state tax evasion charges against the self-styled hotel queen and prove that there is not "one law for the wealthy . . . and another for everyone else." Dabbing her eyes and nose with a tissue, Helmsley sobbed softly as her attorney, Sandor Frankel, said his client had been "ground up in the justice machine for nearly five years." Helmsley, 70, was convicted of federal tax fraud and sentenced last fall to a four-year prison term. The sentence has been stayed pending her appeal. Helmsley now faces prosecution for allegedly cheating on her state taxes. She is accused of disguising millions of dollars in renovations at her Greenwich, Conn., mansion as business expenses incurred by the hotel empire that she and her husband Harry run. Outside state Supreme Court in Manhattan, Helmsley told reporters she was being unfairly pursued by prosecutors because of her celebrity status. She said she would fight the charges and prove her innocence. "Enough's enough," said Helmsley. She burst into tears again and her team of eight lawyers and a handful of bodyguards rushed her toward her gray limousine. "I am not going to jail. I've done nothing wrong. My only crime is that I'm Leona Helmsley. For that I'm guilty," Helmsley said. Harry Helmsley, 81, who was ruled mentally incompetent to stand trial in the federal case, is expected to undergo a competency examination in April in the state case. A hearing was slated for April 30. On Thursday, Frankel urged Justice John Bradley to dismiss charges against Helmsley, saying they were improper because they grew out of immunized testimony she gave to a 1985 grand jury investigating sales tax evasion. He also said the state charges were based on the same allegations as the federal charges and therefore represent double jeopardy. He said Helmsley's conviction on federal tax charges, combined with her state charges on tax evasion, gives the impression "there is one law for the wealthy, well-known and vilified and another for everyone else." Frankel said the public has already gotten a clear message that tax evasion is wrong from the ordeal of Helmsley's federal trial and her stiff prison sentence. "I think the public on the outside looking in would say, 'It's not worth it. The destruction of human life -- what for?' " Frankel said. But Assistant Atty. Gen. Alfredo Mendez said it would be in the interest of justice to prosecute Helmsley to the fullest extent of the law. "We're talking about at least $1 million dollars. I just think about the number of police officers, teachers and school lunches that New Yorkers go without when people don't pay their taxes," said Mendez. The judge said he would rule on the dismissal motions May 17.
19900413000000000	STOCK SPECIALIST FIRM FINED FOR SECURITIES FRAUD. A specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange was fined $480,350 for securities fraud by a judge who said he imposed the sentence as a deterrent. "The trading while in possession of confidential material is a crime." U.S. District Judge Charles S. Haight said Thursday at the sentencing of Marcus Schloss & Co. "It constitutes an affront to the fair operation of the marketplace." Prosecutors said Marcus Schloss was the first NYSE firm to be convicted of felony charges related to insider trading. The company was convicted last July of conspiracy to trade on inside information and of securities fraud in connection with its March 1986 purchase of stock in American Brands Inc. Marcus Schloss could have been fined a maximum of $1 million -- $500,000 for each of two counts. Haight, however, said he considered only a fine of $500,000 because both charges stemmed from the American Brands deal. From that amount, the judge said he subtracted $19,650 which the company previously paid the Securities and Exchange Commission to settle civil charges stemming from the American Brands trade.
19900517000000000	JUDGE DISMISSES 180 TAX COUNTS AGAINST LEONA. A state judge today dismissed nearly all of a 188-count state tax fraud indictment against hotel queen Leona Helmsley, saying the charges constituted double jeopardy because of her federal tax conviction. Helmsley, 70, was not satisfied, saying all the criminal charges should have been dismissed by State Supreme Court Justice John Bradley. "They're after my hide because I'm Leona Helmsley," she told reporters as she left the courthouse with her legal entourage and headed for a black stretch limousine. All eight counts are the same -- offering a false instrument for filing in the first degree. Each has a maximum penalty of four years in prison. Helmsley has already been sentenced to four years in prison for her federal conviction last summer. A jury found that she cheated the government out of millions of dollars in taxes by disguising renovations to her Greenwich, Conn., mansion as business expenses of the hotel empire she runs with her husband, Harry. Bradley dismissed 180 counts in the 188-count state indictment, nearly all of which stem from activities at Dunnellen Hall, the 26-acre estate. He said a double-jeopardy situation was created by the joint state-federal investigations, in which many of the same witnesses were presented to state and federal grand juries. The eight counts Bradley left intact concern a condominium in North Hills, N.Y., and the Park Lane Hotel in New York City. Bradley rejected Helmsley's arguments that all charges should be dropped in "the interest of justice." "It has long been a concern of the public that white-collar criminals not be coddled by the criminal justice system," Bradley wrote. Helmsley's federal sentence is stayed pending appeal. Her lawyer, Alan Dershowitz, is confident that she will not spend a day in jail.
19900623000000000	DREXEL AIDE'S SENTENCE FOR LYING REDUCED; WALL STREET: LISA JONES WAS CONVICTED IN MARCH, 1989, OF SEVEN COUNTS OF PERJURY IN FRONT OF A GRAND JURY INVESTIGATING THE BROKERAGE.. Lisa A. Jones, a teen-age runaway who became a $100,000-a-year trading assistant at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., got a reduction Friday in the sentence she received for lying to a grand jury investigating Wall Street fraud. U.S. District Judge Leonard B. Sand reduced his original 18-month prison sentence to 10 months after an appeals court threw out the longer term on grounds that it was stiffer than mandated by federal sentencing guidelines. Sand also fined Jones $25,000 and ordered her to pay $14,850 for the cost of her incarceration. In addition, he required her to receive mental health treatment during her term. The U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the original sentence violated guidelines that govern crimes occurring after January, 1987. Jones, 27, was convicted in March, 1989, of seven counts of perjury and obstruction of justice for lying in January, 1988, to a federal grand jury investigating trading activities at Drexel. Sand said he was sympathetic to Jones' psychological problems and troubled childhood -- she ran away from home at 14 -- but said deterrence was necessary because she lied repeatedly to investigators. Jones' behavior was "not a sudden impulse," the judge said. "It was a persistent conduct of perjury on several occasions, despite warnings" from the government. Jones, who worked at Drexel's Beverly Hills junk- bond department, was the first person convicted in the government's lengthy investigation of fraud on Wall Street. She was an assistant to Drexel trader Bruce L. Newberg, who was convicted in the Princeton-Newport case and sentenced to three months in prison. She was not charged with violating securities laws. Jones sobbed throughout the sentencing and afterward was hugged by three friends, including Newberg's wife. "Nothing takes away this agony for very long," she said in a letter to the judge. "I live each day in the totality of my crisis. There are never-ending sleepless nights and days full of anxiety. "I have been shattered and humiliated," she wrote. "I don't even know where to begin to try to rebuild my life." Jones is to surrender to federal authorities by July 23 to begin her sentence. She must spend five months at a minimum-security prison camp in Phoenix before becoming eligible for transfer to a halfway house in Los Angeles or to home detention.
19900721000000000	OFFICIALS PRAISE STIFF TERM IN S&L FRAUD CASE. The sentencing Friday of Janet Faye McKinzie to a 20-year prison term for her role in the collapse of North America Savings & Loan brought wide praise from thrift regulators and law enforcement authorities. McKinzie's sentence, which was coupled with an order to repay $14 million swindled from the now-defunct Santa Ana thrift, is one of the stiffest penalties in the nation for anyone charged with thrift fraud. She was a consultant to North America, but, as a close associate of the S&L's late owner, Duayne D. Christensen, she was the thrift's de facto head, regulators had charged. Comments came from across the country: "From the evening of Jan. 16, 1987, I have been certain of the mass fraud that was committed by Jan McKinzie and (Duayne) Doc Christensen," said William D. Davis, commissioner of the state Department of Savings and Loan. Davis acted as conservator for the state when it seized the S&L after Christensen's death in a car accident. "Her sentence fits the crime," said William K. Black, counsel for the Office of Thrift Supervision's district headquarters in San Francisco. "We're delighted the court had the courage to impose a sentence commensurate with the incredible scope of criminal conduct at the S&L. I think it sends a very important signal deterring people from this kind of conduct in the future." "Both portions of the sentence are excellent," said Lawrence G. Lawler, special agent in charge of the FBI's Los Angeles office. His seven-county district, which includes Orange County, is continuing to investigate further allegations at North America. "This represents a dramatic increase in the length of sentences now being handed out to these white-collar criminals. It's a reflection of an understanding on the part of courts about the public outcry on these financial fraud-related cases," said Douglas Tillett, a Justice Department spokesman in Washington. The order to repay $14 million is an "unknown factor," Davis said. "There was a lot of money that disappeared from that institution and nobody has been able to nail down where it went," he said. "It wouldn't surprise me that she would have access to those funds." Her stiff sentence is also part of a nationwide trend that federal authorities are beginning to see in prosecutions of white-collar criminals in the savings and loan scandal. "Typically, we've seen a dramatic increase in the length of sentences," Tillett said. Statistics to support the trend, however, were not available Friday. Data provided by the Justice Department, however, does indicate that the days of the slap on the wrist as punishment for fraud are drawing to a close. The agency has won convictions of 211 people in major thrift fraud cases since Oct. 1, 1988. Of that total, 153 people have been sentenced so far, and 78% of them -- 119 -- sent to prison, Tillett said. The average jail time is a little more than three years, he said. But he estimated that about half the sentences meted out are three- to five-year terms and roughly 25% exceed 10 years. While Black also sees a trend toward heavier sentences of thrift defrauders, he said a continuing problem remains -- courts are inconsistent.
19900821000000000	$71-MILLION RESTITUTION SET IN FRAUD CASE. A Los Angeles federal court judge Monday imposed a 15-year prison sentence on David A. Feldman of Palos Verdes, convicted of a massive bank fraud, and ordered him to pay $70.7 million in restitution to Bank of America. Federal prosecutors said they believed that the restitution award is the largest imposed in a bank fraud case. It was unclear, however, whether Feldman has the resources to make restitution. U.S. District Judge Dickran M. Tevrizian imposed the stiff sentence on Feldman, 50, who was convicted of three counts of felony mail fraud in June. The judge issued stinging criticism of Feldman, who graduated near the top of his class at West Point. "The only thing he has demonstrated to me is that he has no conscience," Tevrizian said. Feldman and two others were indicted in May, 1989, in connection with a scheme to sell more than $144 million in mortgage loans to 20 banks and savings and loans, all of which operate outside California. Feldman controlled National Mortgage Equity Corp., which allegedly made false representations and concealed material facts in selling mortgage-backed securities to financial institutions. Feldman assured financial institutions their investments were protected against defaults in various ways, including independent underwriting of borrowers' ability to pay and of the value of the real property securing the loans. However, Feldman and his co-defendants concealed the fact that there was no independent underwriting because the brokers, insurance firms and borrowers all were controlled by the same persons. Feldman, according to court documents, diverted millions in investor funds through fictitious borrowers to a bonding firm, Glacier General Assurance, to enable it to pay off its obligations on prior defaulted loans. Feldman also used NMEC investors' money to purchase apartment complexes in Houston for a firm owned by co-defendant Kent B. Rogers of Huntington Beach. Prosecutors charged that Feldman gave Rogers $24 million of investors' money for construction loans without placing controls on Rogers' use of the funds to refurbish and convert the Texas apartments to condominiums. Rogers pleaded guilty and awaits sentencing. Most investors' losses were covered by Bank of America, which acted as an escrow agent and trustee for all but three of the mortgage pools, according to Assistant U.S. Atty. Leslie A. Swain and California Deputy Atty. Gen. Sharon McCaslin. The bank has sought to recover its losses through civil litigation. Bank senior counsel John C. Fauvre estimated the losses at $117.7 million. Tevrizian denied Feldman bail pending appeal. Prosecutors said he will spend the next 60 days at Metropolitan Detention Center in downtown Los Angeles and then be assigned to another prison. Prosecutors recommended that prison officials keep an especially close watch on Feldman, noting that he perpetrated some of his crimes while serving a prison term for an earlier fraud conviction.
19900925000000000	2 WHO DEFRAUDED N. AMERICA S&L AVOID JAIL TERMS. The final two defendants in the North America Savings & Loan scandal were each sentenced Monday to serve one month in a halfway house and ordered to pay $35,000 in restitution and fines for laundering $1.5 million stolen from the now-defunct thrift. Armando J. Vasquez, 53, and Frederick Youngdahl, 55, were convicted last month of bank fraud for submitting phony invoices to North America and then returning the money they received -- minus a $25,000 laundering fee -- to thrift Chairman Duayne D. Christensen. U.S. District Judge Alicemarie H. Stotler denied a request by federal prosecutors to imprison the two, agreeing with the defense that they were bit players in a fraud that caused the failure of the thrift. "I am extremely sorry that my actions, however small, hurt the public," said Vasquez, a Costa Mesa architect. "I am ashamed." Youngdahl, a Newport Beach engineer, declined to comment in court. North America was seized by regulators in 1987, and its failure is estimated to cost taxpayers $120 million. The case was described by federal authorities as particularly egregious because the masterminds behind the fraud -- Christensen and consultant Janet Faye McKinzie -- spent much of the thrift's money on extravagances like Rolls-Royces and lavish parties. McKinzie was convicted in March on 22 of 26 counts that included racketeering, conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property. Stotler sentenced McKinzie to 20 years in jail, the harshest punishment meted out in California and the second-longest nationwide for an insider involved in the nation's savings and loan debacle. The former real estate agent and high school dropout had pleaded that she was temporarily insane because she was under the influence of prescription drugs as well as Christensen himself, whom her attorney characterized as "the Jim Jones of the savings and loan industry." Vasquez and Youngdahl claimed that they, too, were taken in by Christensen, a major client of both men. Christensen was an unindicted co-conspirator in the North America trials. He died in a mysterious car accident just 9 1/2 hours before regulators seized North America. Youngdahl's attorney, Richard G. Hirsch, said his client was still in something of a fog about the transactions that got him into trouble. "Mr. Youngdahl to this day is still somewhat under the spell of Dr. Christensen," Hirsch said. Assistant U.S. Atty. Paul L. Seave told Stotler he didn't believe the defendants' stories. "Each defendant, a successful entrepreneur, portrayed himself as an innocent dupe, totally ignorant of any wrongdoing -- or even the possibility of wrongdoing -- by Christensen," Seave said in his sentencing recommendation. "The defendants' stories, in the government's view, were wholly incredible." Stotler denied a federal recommendation that the two men pay millions of dollars in restitution, saying the $13.5 million that McKinzie was ordered to return in restitution and fines would cover the money stolen through the money-laundering scheme. "I do believe Mr. Vasquez when he says it won't happen again," Stotler said. Monday's sentencing marked the end of the federal government's criminal prosecution of those involved in the North America fraud. Altogether, seven people were convicted of crimes ranging from racketeering to making false statements. "Christensen and McKinzie used other people, including their good friends, to accomplish a massive looting of the savings and loan," Seave said after the sentencing. "It's sad they not only stole from the taxpayers but exploited their friends for their own greed."  THE NORTH AMERICA S&L SCANDAL North America Savings & Loan in Santa Ana was seized by regulators in 1987 and its collapse is expected to cost taxpayers $120 million. Seven people connected with the S&L were convicted, including thrift consultant Janet Faye McKinzie. She received 20 years in jail in July, the stiffest sentence ever meted out in California and the second- longest nationwide for a S&L insider involved in the country's thrift debacle. Below is a tally of the punishments issued against others involved in North America's failure. Defendant: Janet Faye McKinzie Conviction: Racketeering, conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud, interstate transportation of stolen property Sentence: 20 years jail; $13.5 million restitution  Defendant: David L. Morgan Conviction: Bank fraud and conspiracy Sentence: 1 year, 1 day jail  Defendant: Frederick Youngdahl Conviction: Bank fraud Sentence: 1 month halfway house; $35,000 restitution and fines  Defendant: Armando J. Vasquez Conviction: Bank fraud Sentence: 1 month halfway house; $35,000 restitution and fines  Defendant: Victoria R. Walker Conviction: Bank fraud and conspiracy Sentence: 90 days work-release; $5,000 fine; 3 years probation  Defendant: Kathleen A. Taormina Conviction: Making false statement Sentence: 3 years probation; $5,000 fine; 300 hours community service  Defendant: Thomas C. Clarke Conviction: Making false statement Sentence: 2 years probation; 200 hours community service  Source: U.S. attorney's office
19901101000000000	ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COSTA MESA; 3 PLEAD GUILTY IN HIRING-FEE SCAM. A former executive of Digital Equipment Corp. and two others pleaded guilty Tuesday to siphoning nearly $300,000 from the computer company and agreed to repay the money in lieu of a prison term, Costa Mesa police said. The executive, Steven William Hunt, 43, of Arcadia, and his accomplices, John Francis Mazarella, 54, of Mission Viejo, and Danielle Ann Marie, 42, of Laguna Niguel, were each sentenced to eight years in prison and three years' probation. They each pleaded guilty to 12 counts of felony grand theft and fraud. The prison sentences, handed down in a Harbor Division courtroom, will be delayed pending repayment of the embezzled funds, Costa Mesa Police Detective Steven R. Labbitt said. The three were arrested in June after a clerical error revealed that Hunt was falsely steering referral fees to Mazarella and Marie, who had set up bogus executive employment agencies. Under the scheme, Hunt scanned applications from newly hired employees in high-paying, high-tech positions, Labbitt said. Hunt separated those who had been referred to Digital Equipment Corp. by legitimate executive search firms from those who responded to newspaper advertisements or applied on recommendations from other workers, Labbitt said. Hunt forwarded information detailing annual salaries and positions of those employees not referred by head-hunting agencies to Mazarella and Marie, Labbitt said. Mazarella, an independent consultant hired to screen employees for Digital Equipment, and Marie, who was not connected to the company, set up a phony employment agency and used the information supplied by Hunt to bill Digital. "Hunt would receive the invoice and authorize its payment, and it would then go to the finance department," Labbitt said after the arrest. "They would see his authorization for payment and, because it was his responsibility for processing the invoices, they would cut a check and send it out to any one of the four fictitious businesses (the suspects) had set up." Each invoice typically requested 15% of the new employee's annual salary, which ranged from $50,000 to $80,000, Labbitt said. The suspects allegedly collected fees totaling nearly $300,000 between 1986 and 1989 by claiming that they had referred 30 new employees to Digital. The amount of restitution to the company will be determined at a hearing next month, Labbitt said. TONY MARCANO
19901122000000000	JUDGE STUNS MILKEN WITH 10-YEAR SENTENCE; SECURITIES FRAUD: SHE SAYS THE TERM IS INTENDED TO MAKE AN EXAMPLE OF THE EX-JUNK BOND KING. SHE IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS COMMITTED ADDITIONAL SERIOUS CRIMES.. A federal judge sentenced an apparently stunned Michael Milken to 10 years in prison Wednesday after ruling that the crimes he pleaded guilty to were neither minor nor isolated. The sentence was by far the harshest imposed in the recent chain of Wall Street scandals. U.S. District Judge Kimba M. Wood said the unexpectedly long prison term is meant to make an example of the former Drexel Burnham Lambert junk bond king, whose innovative use of high-yield, high-risk bonds had fueled the corporate takeover frenzy of the 1980s. Milken had pleaded guilty to six felony securities law violations last April. But in a jammed courtroom in Manhattan's federal courthouse, Wood said that Milken, 44, who has been accused, among other things, of helping to bring on the national savings and loan disaster, could not be blamed for all of the financial excesses of the 1980s. Wood said she had not made him a scapegoat for "the decade of greed." The judge said she based the sentence only on evidence of specific crimes presented in court. Milken family members, supporters and lawyers were plainly shocked by the sentence. One close Milken adviser said: "No one could have imagined this in their wildest nightmare." Defense lawyer Arthur L. Liman left the courthouse without commenting and did not return phone calls later. Milken's sentence also included three years' probation during which he must perform full-time community service. The judge left open the possibility of reducing the sentence if Milken cooperates with the government. Milken could have been sentenced to as many as 28 years. But a number of lawyers who had followed the case closely predicted that he would get no more than five. A Milken spokesman said that no decision had been made on whether to appeal the sentence. During his own lawyer's presentation before sentence was imposed, Milken at times was in tears in the courtroom. He then stood and, choking back sobs, said: "What I did violated not just the law but all of my own principles and values. I deeply regret it and will for the rest of my life, and I am very deeply sorry." But when the judge read the sentence, he stood rigid and motionless, with what appeared to be a look of disbelief when she announced the 10-year term. Wood also sentenced him to three years of community service while on probation after his prison sentence. Milken and his wife, Lori, did not comment to reporters and were permitted to leave the courthouse through a back exit. Under his plea agreement, Milken was already committed to pay $600 million in fines and penalties. Lawyers said he must turn over that amount before the end of the year. Because of his huge earnings at Drexel, however, his wealth is expected to be at least hundreds of millions of dollars. Wood said evidence presented during a pre-sentencing hearing in October convinced her that Milken had committed additional serious crimes beyond the six felony counts he pleaded guilty to in April. Among them, she said, were several acts of obstruction of justice relating to orders or suggestions to employees to destroy documents. The judge also rejected longstanding defense claims that Milken's crimes were aberrations by a generally law-abiding man and that they were the result of overzealousness to help clients rather than greed. Wood called Milken "a man of talent and industry." But she said: "This kind of misuse of your leadership position and enlisting employees who you supervised to assist you in violating the law are serious crimes warranting serious punishment and the discomfort and opprobrium of being removed from society." At Liman's request, the judge agreed to sentence Milken under a provision of federal law that allows him to be paroled at any time at the discretion of the federal parole commission. Although Milken technically could be paroled almost immediately, government lawyers said the commission normally requires prisoners to serve close to two-thirds of their sentence. In Milken's case, that would be about six years. The sentence exceeds all others imposed in the series of securities fraud cases that grew out of the insider trading case against investment banker Dennis B. Levine in 1986. Levine himself got two years. Stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky, implicated in insider trading on an even grander scale, got only three years. Investment banker Martin A. Siegel, who directly stole information from his own corporate clients and also received suitcases stuffed with cash from Boesky, was let off with only two months. But in those cases, the defendants had fully cooperated with the government before their sentencing, turning in prominent former business associates. Milken had not. Under the highly unusual terms of his plea agreement, he is obliged to begin cooperating only now that the sentence has been imposed. The judge said she would consider reducing the sentence if prosecutors eventually certify to her that Milken has cooperated fully. Several lawyers said they interpreted the long sentence as an attempt by the judge to ensure that Milken cooperates fully, revealing whatever incriminating information he knows about corporate raiders, junk bond buyers and former co-workers. Charles Carberry, a lawyer who once headed the U.S. attorney's securities fraud unit in New York, said: "I think it was a clear message that he should cooperate." John C. Coffee, a Columbia University law professor, said the judge may also have imposed the severe sentence because Milken occupied a position of trust at the center of the financial world. "There's a long tradition here of viewing very seriously abuses by people with high responsibilities, and this man was at the crossroads of capitalism," Coffee said. The six counts that Milken pleaded guilty to included conspiracy, securities fraud, causing the filing of false information with the Securities and Exchange Commission, mail fraud and aiding in the filing of a false tax return. The sentencing capped the most massive securities fraud investigation ever carried out by the government. Milken, who joined Drexel while still in business school in 1969, plucked junk bonds from obscurity and almost single-handedly built what at its peak became a $200-billion market. From Drexel's junk bond headquarters in Beverly Hills, Milken orchestrated transactions that made possible huge leveraged buyouts of such companies as Storer Communications and Beatrice Cos. But as investigators closed in, Milken was forced to resign from Drexel in 1989, after he was named in a 99-count racketeering indictment and the firm itself pleaded guilty to six felony counts. Months later, the junk bond market started to collapse. And in February, Drexel was forced into bankruptcy proceedings. Milken's pay at Drexel peaked in 1987 at $550 million. In addition to total compensation of more than $1 billion from 1984 to 1988, Milken is believed to have received hundreds of millions of dollars from private partnerships he set up to benefit himself, family members and employees. Milken's lawyers, however, said that Milken's lifestyle was relatively modest and unmaterialistic. They noted that he had given much of his earnings to charities and that he long had personally worked for them, such as by teaching math to abused and abandoned inner-city children. Liman called Milken "a sensitive human being with a social conscience whose offenses stand in sharp contrast to his whole life and to his value system." Liman also argued that Milken is "just not cut from the same cloth as Ivan Boesky." The judge did not dispute that Milken had donated much to worthy causes, nor that his charitable activities began well before the investigation of him started in 1986. But she said that was not enough to make up for his crimes. During the sentencing, Wood disclosed for the first time her findings on the unusual pre-sentencing hearings she presided over in October. The so-called Fatico hearings were held to determine if there were evidence of additional crimes beyond the six to which he pleaded guilty. Under federal court rulings, Wood is allowed to consider evidence of other crimes in deciding on a sentence. In a lengthy written opinion released Wednesday, Wood found that Assistant U.S. Attorneys John Carroll and Jess Fardella had failed to prove some of their main claims. She said there was insufficient evidence to prove that Milken was behind a manipulation of WickesCos. stock in 1986. She said the government also did not prove its claim that Milken was guilty of insider trading in Caesars World securities in 1983, and also failed to show that he had illegally made lucrative investment opportunities available to employees of investment funds as inducements to get them to buy riskier securities for their funds. But she found that Milken had obstructed justice, in part, by arranging the destruction of a blue ledger book that showed illegal transactions between Drexel and David Solomon, head of Solomon Asset Management. The judge said Milken also had made remarks to employees in the Beverly Hills office in November, 1986, which could only be interpreted as instructions to destroy documents. Wood also found that Milken had acted improperly by not disclosing to the leveraged buyout firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. that he had kept extremely valuable warrants in a KKR deal for himself and his family instead of selling them to customers. During the sentencing, Wood derided defense claims that Milken was basically law-abiding and that if he were not, he would have committed more blatant crimes, such as insider trading. She said that an equally likely explanation was that Milken was simply afraid to do anything too blatant. "Your crimes show a pattern of skirting the law, stepping just over to the wrong side of the law in an apparent effort to get some of the benefits from violating the law without running a substantial risk of being caught," she said. Wood's sentence was viewed as a rebuff to many prominent Southern Californians who had written to her urging that Milken's sentence be limited to community service. Among those who had proposed that Milken was suitable for such service was Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates, who suggested that Milken work for the Police Department's DARE program, created to help inner-city children. In court, Liman had proposed that the judge accept Gates' suggestion. The chief, through a spokesman, declined to comment on the sentence. James Slade, a spokesman for the federal Bureau of Prisons, said that under Justice Department rules, the 10-year term makes it unlikely that Milken will be allowed to serve his sentence in a minimum-security federal prison camp. Such camps, where Boesky and others caught up in the Wall Street scandals served their sentences, have open rooms instead of cells and offer extensive recreation facilities. Instead, Slade said, Milken probably will be sent to a medium-security prison, where there will be a higher concentration of street criminals and fewer white-collar offenders. He said that in some medium-security prisons, inmates are locked in old-fashioned barred cells at night. Staff writer Paul Richter in New York contributed to this story.  FALL OF THE JUNK BOND KING Here is a chronology of key developments in the prosecution of former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. high-yield bond chief Michael Milken: Nov. 14, 1986: Stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky agrees topays $100 million to settle charges of insider trading, cooperate with investigators and plead guilty to a single criminal count. Later is sentenced to three years in prison. Nov.-Dec. 1986: Published reports link Milken to an illegal insider trading network led by Boesky. Sept. 7, 1988: The Securities and Exchange Commission accuses Drexel, Milken and three others of violating a range of securities laws, most in connection with Boesky. Dec. 21, 1988: Drexel agrees to plead guilty to six felony counts and pay $650 million in fines and restitution to settle the biggest securities fraud probe in history. March 29, 1989: A federal grand jury indicts Milken, his brother, Lowell, and former Drexel trader Bruce Newberg on 98 counts of racketeering and fraud, based on information fromBoesky. April 7, 1989: The Milkens plead not guilty Newberg does the same later. April 13, 1989: Drexel and the SEC announce a settlement of the government 's civil fraud case against the firm that subjects Drexel to federal monitoring for three years and forces it to sever ties with Milken. June 15, 1989: Milken resigns after 19 years at Drexel to form his own consulting firm. Lowell Milken quits to return to practice law. Sept. 11, 1989: Drexel formally pleads guilty and begins paying its fine. Feb. 13, 1990: Drexel's parent company, Drexel Burnham Lambert Group, files for bankruptcy court protection after defaulting on debts and begins laying off employees. March 19, 1990: Prosecutors promise to bring a new indictment with broader charges against Milken by the week of April 16. April 20, 1990: Milken agrees to settle his case and reaches a plea bargain with the government. April 24, 1990: Milken tearfully pleads guilty to six felonies, agrees to pay $600 million in restitution and fines, and agrees to cooperate with the government after sentencing. He faces up to 28 years in jail. October 1990: Special two-week hearing to consider the government's array of charges against Milken, ordered by U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood to gain greater insight into Milken's character in order to fashion a fair sentence for the six counts he admitted. Nov. 21, 1990: Milken is sentenced to 10 years in jail, plus three years' probation, plus 1,800 hours of community service. The sentence could be reduced if Milken cooperates with the government in ongoing and future investigations.
19901129000000000	JUDGE ASKS LAWYERS TO TOTAL FRAUD LOSSES IN MILKEN CASE. A federal judge Wednesday asked lawyers for the government and Michael Milken to calculate the total amount of fraud in Milken's crimes to help authorities determine how much prison time he must serve. Federal parole officials need an estimate to recommend when Milken will be eligible for parole, and the number could affect the length of incarceration by more than two years. U.S. District Judge Kimba M. Wood last week sentenced the former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. financier to 10 years in prison for six felony counts related to illegal securities trading. At a hearing in Manhattan federal court Wednesday, Wood said that because of the nature of Milken's crimes it was not easy to calculate losses to victims. She said the parole commission "never had anything like this in mind." While the parole commission makes its own calculation on such losses, Wood said she wants to present officials with a number agreeable to both sides. Under parole guidelines, a first offender such as Milken would face a minimum prison term of 24 months to 36 months if victims' losses ranged from $200,000 to $1 million. If the fraud exceeds $1 million, Milken's recommended prison term before parole would equal 40 months to 52 months. But the parole commission is not bound by the guidelines. Milken attorney Arthur L. Liman said at the hearing that he believed the amount would not exceed $1 million. Wood scheduled a Dec. 6 hearing on the matter. As part of his plea deal, Milken agreed to pay $200 million in criminal fines and penalties and place $400 million into a fund to compensate investors hurt by his crimes. But that figure does not constitute an estimate of losses. Milken's lawyers have 10 days from the date the sentence judgment was entered formally in U.S. District Court to appeal the 10-year term. Court officials said the sentence judgment was to occur Wednesday, after Wood allocated $1.5 million as a criminal fine and the remainder of the $200 million as a penalty, completing details of the sentencing. Liman declined to comment on a published report Wednesday that he planned to appeal the sentence.
19901207000000000	BROKER GETS 6 YEARS IN $12-MILLION FRAUD; REAL ESTATE: CALIFORNIA ANCHOR GROUP'S EX-PRESIDENT HAD ASKED TO SERVE 1 WEEK A MONTH IN JAIL FOR 10 YEARS.. The former president of a Woodland Hills real estate investment company that defrauded more than 200 investors out of an estimated $12 million was sentenced Thursday in federal court to six years in prison. In sentencing Alan R. Keranen, 42, to federal prison, U.S. District Judge William Matthew Byrne rejected an unusual request from Keranen that he receive a 10-year sentence during which he would be jailed one week of every month and be free the rest of the time to work to pay back the investors. Byrne rejected the proposal, saying the fraud was too serious not to merit a standard prison sentence. Assistant U.S. Atty. Anita H. Dymant also opposed Keranen's proposal and had asked Byrne to sentence the once-flamboyant salesman to 10 years in prison. In sentencing Keranen to six years, Byrne also ordered him to make restitution of $3.5 million to investors. Keranen, who used to live in Woodland Hills but now resides in Oregon, was charged in June with taking nearly $4 million in cash and real estate from California Anchor Group after fraudulently enticing investors with claims of 25% yearly returns on their investments. The company was supposed to build and sell San Fernando Valley apartment complexes, but prosecutors said only about 3% of the investors' money went into such developments. Keranen later pleaded guilty to two counts of bank fraud and two counts of mail fraud. "I committed the crimes," Keranen said tearfully during his sentencing hearing. "I did wrong." Robert Dumas and Ronald Stoliar, California Anchor vice presidents, pleaded guilty to lesser charges. Stoliar was placed on five years probation by Byrne. Dumas, who was scheduled to be sentenced Thursday, did not appear and a warrant has been issued for his arrest. Keranen has filed for bankruptcy and his attorney said he had about $100,000 available for restitution. A handful of California Anchor investors watched the sentencing and left with little hope of ever getting much of their money back. "The chances are about as good as getting a glass of ice water in hell," said Terry Thomason, a Canoga Park investor who said his family lost $250,000 in the scam.
