10000000000000000	Threat to Wildlife by Poachers Where have poachers endangered wildlife  wildlife has been endangered and steps have been taken to prevent poaching.
19890125000000000	RING OF BEAR-POACHERS BROKEN; 11 ARE ARRESTED. A poaching ring that involved the slaughter of more than 400 black bears in the Northeast was broken Tuesday with the arrests of 11 people, officials said. The bears were killed for their gall bladders, which are prized as aphrodisiacs in the Far East. The arrests were the culmination of a 2 1/2-year investigation by wildlife officials from Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
19890226000000000	LOSS OF MILLIONS SEEN AS ANIMALS ARE KILLED; AFRICAN POACHERS PERILING TOURIST TRADE. Big game is big business in parts of Africa. Tourists pay millions of dollars a year to come and see Africa's wildlife -- and smugglers pay millions more in strictly illegal purchases of ivory and rhino horn from poachers. In Tanzania, the government charges $2,500 for each elephant legally shot by a hunter. That is just the start of the money the government makes from the scores of big game hunters who come here, the main jumping-off point for the rolling plains and desolate mountains of northern and western Tanzania. Tanzania is one of the few places left where hunters can legally kill big game. "We have enough animals here," said Muhidin Ndolanga, general manager of the Tanzania Wildlife Corporation, the state-owned company that runs all the country's hunting safaris. "If people want to pay money to kill some, well then they might as well do it here," he said. However, as poachers step up the slaughter, governments across Africa are concerned that soon they may not have the animals that tourists want to see. Kenya banned big game hunting in 1977 and this year said poachers would be shot on sight. Three have been shot already, and even more have been killed in Zimbabwe, the only other country with a shoot-to-kill policy toward poachers. In Zambia, the government has been steadily cutting down the number of hunting safaris allowed to about half a dozen a year. A handful of countries, including Ethiopia and the Central African Republic, allow a small number of hunters. But about 200 hunters a year come to Tanzania. Their bag runs to about 100 elephant a year, in addition to game ranging from lions to baboons. In contrast, in just one August raid, Tanzanian police seized the tusks of 198 elephants killed by poachers. Poachers kill several thousand elephants every year. Tanzania gets nothing of their earnings, but the government made $3.5 million from its hunting safaris in 1987. Ndolanga said he expects income will rise this year. Only some of this comes from the government's killing fees -- $2,500 a head for elephant, $1,400 for lion and leopard and $365 for a zebra. Cheetah, rhinoceros and giraffe may not be killed. To shoot elephants or the big cats, hunters must sign up for at least a 21-day safari, at a cost of between $560 and $825 per person per day, depending on how large their party is and how many professionals are hired to help them find their animals. Every change of camp costs another $1,850, while transport to the hunting grounds ranges from $1,200 to $2,100 per vehicle. Chartered aircraft, liquor and soft drinks are extra, as is the $1,000 fee for packing, documenting and shipping each trophy the hunter decides to keep. The hunters, who mostly come from the United States, are the big spenders of Tanzania's tourist industry. They accounted for more than a fifth of the $15.3 million Tanzania earned from its 118,000 foreign tourists during the year to the end of June -- a fraction of neighboring Kenya's projected 1988 earnings of $385 million from 700,000 visitors. But the poaching is threatening to wipe out this lucrative source of income. Tanzania's elephant population has been more than halved over the last decade to an estimated 77,000, largely because of poaching, Kenya-based conservationist Ian Douglas-Hamilton says. The population is dropping by 5.5% a year, which is quick enough to wipe out Tanzania's elephants by the end of the century.
19890306000000000	UGANDA'S ELEPHANT HERDS ENDANGERED, CONSERVATIONIST SAYS. Elephant herds, cut to a fraction of their former size by poachers and trigger-happy Ugandan soldiers, will be wiped out soon if current losses continue, according to a Ugandan conservation expert. Eric Edroma, director of the Uganda Institute of Ecology, said Saturday that only 1,500 to 2,000 remain of the 20,000 elephants that roamed Uganda in the 1960s. Most of the losses occurred in the 1970s when dictator Idi Amin's soldiers killed the animals indiscriminately. Losses of elephants and other animals continued on a large scale in some areas after Amin was overthrown in 1979. Edroma said rebels are killing an estimated 10 to 15 elephants a month in the Murchison Falls National Park in northern Uganda. The authorities believe ivory from the tusks is being smuggled out through Zaire and Sudan, with the proceeds used by rebel groups to buy arms and ammunition.
19890508000000000	PUBLIC BACKS NOTED PALEONTOLOGIST LEAKEY; RIVALRIES OVER WILDLIFE POACHING GRIP KENYA. This is what happened after Richard E. Leakey, world-renowned paleontologist, author and conservationist, head of the Kenya National Museums for 20 years, decided to speak out on the issue of wildlife poaching in the country's national parks: Leakey's reputation as a scientist and museum administrator was harshly attacked in the local press. The government reorganized the museum board behind his back, prompting him to submit his resignation. Despite being a native Kenyan and a citizen, whose younger brother serves in the Kenyan Parliament and as deputy tourism minister, Leakey was derided by one government minister as a "cheeky white" who felt that black Africans could not manage their own affairs. But in the fullness of time, Leakey's reputation and career have recovered. Soon after his resignation, a public uproar forced the government to restore the old museum board, and he withdrew his resignation. More recently, Leakey became head of the Department of Wildlife Conservation and Management, succeeding one of his critics. For all of that, his experiences underscore one thing: wildlife conservation in Kenya is sensitive business.  Conservation Rivalries Few events have laid open the rivalries between conservationists and bureaucrats -- and among the conservationists themselves -- as a scandal here over poaching and Leakey's outspokenness on the subject. How Kenya undertakes to protect its valued wildlife has long been a tender issue, because there is little any developing country can do to combat a gang of determined poachers. Many people here feel that the only solution is to "privatize" wildlife preserves, by establishing quasi-private companies to run existing preserves or otherwise placing them in private hands that can afford to safeguard their perimeters. But Kenyan officials are particularly sensitive to criticism, partly because they fear the impact that negative publicity might have on the country's significant tourist trade. "After all, most of us want to remain in the country," remarked one leading local zoologist, who was reluctant to discuss the issue. With a multiplicity of international and local wildlife clubs and funds and societies representing a variety of interests and philosophies, Kenyan conservationists, like keepers of the flame anywhere, often spend as much time sorting out their own differences as they do fighting a common foe. "Oh, yes," says Imre Loefler, a local surgeon and prominent conservationist, "there are enormous disagreements in the conservation community. This community has various traits and prejudices. At one extreme is the most bigoted right wing -- strictly anti-humans -- and at the other are those only interested in a few species. They're generally employed in the tourist industry." In few other places, moreover, are the conflicts between the needs of wildlife protection and those of the human population so sharply etched as in Kenya. Wildlife is Kenya's greatest tourist draw, and tourism its third-largest foreign exchange earner: The 700,000 visitors expected this year will leave behind well over $350 million in foreign currency. With coffee and tea prices locked in a long slump, tourism may be Kenya's only growth industry.  Competing With Humans Yet Kenya's elephants, rhinos, lions and antelope occupy land that comes at an increasing premium and for which they must compete ever more aggressively with the country's human population, which is growing faster than that of any other nation. In Narok, a farm district next to Masai Mara National Park, one of Kenya's most popular game reserves, a herd of elephants not long ago invaded a plantation of bananas and vegetables; in their haste to reach the food, they trampled a woman to death. In Tana River district, which includes part of Tsavo East Game Reserve, 88 people have been killed by animals since 1980, according to the Department of Tourism and Wildlife. "With growing population pressures, one has to show the politicians that setting aside preserves is economically productive, whether that involves tourism, hunting or exploitation" such as harvesting ivory, Loefler says. "You can't tell people anymore that we're just going to do this for sentimental reasons." Adding to the underlying tension is a racial element: The wildlife conservation community here largely comprises white expatriate Europeans and Americans, some of whom may not be fully sensitive to the competing interests of a poor and developing land. What set all this tinder aflame was an apparent surge of poaching late last year in Kenya's national parks. Tourists began returning from safaris in the parks, not with tales of bongo on the hoof and lions at repose yawning in the grass and trees, but of mountains of elephant carcasses, with trunks and tusks ghoulishly lopped off. Reports reached Nairobi of poaching gangs armed with automatic weapons engaging park rangers in lengthy shoot-outs. In November, Perez Olindo, Leakey's predecessor as director of Wildlife and Conservation Management, detailed the six-month war's casualties: six game rangers killed, nine wounded. In the longer term, Olindo said, poaching had reduced Kenya's elephant population in 13 years from 140,000 to 22,000. Other unofficial estimates placed the elephant population as low as 16,000. It was into this ferment that Leakey jumped with both feet last fall. Just after Tourism and Wildlife Minister George Muhoho called a news conference to pledge a redoubled government anti-poaching effort, Leakey called his own conference as chairman of the East African Wildlife Society. Calling poaching "a growing national crisis" and "economic sabotage," he labeled the government's approach toward wildlife protection "lip service" and charged that high officials of the wildlife department itself were participating in poaching. The remarks by Leakey, one of the few Kenyans of his stature to speak out, brought the poaching issue to the forefront of national and international attention. The elder son of the late Louis Leakey, whose work at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania was critical in the study of early man, Leakey has made many important discoveries himself. His directorship of the national museums is widely regarded as having given those institutions a preeminent position in study of prehistory.  Family's Prominent Role Finally, there could be few white families who have played as prominent a role as natives and citizens in Kenya's post-independence period as have the Leakeys. Muhoho at first replied with what Kenya's leading newspaper, the Daily Nation, later disapprovingly termed a "contentious response": He called Leakey a "cheeky white." Yet, it was not only Kenyan officials who felt Leakey had shot from the hip. "There's no question whatsoever that he was doing a bit of grandstanding," said David Western, chairman of the governing council of the Wildlife Clubs of Kenya. In any event, the wildlife rangers temporarily recovered some of their morale. The government staffed the parks with a detachment of its paramilitary General Services Unit,  Mounds of Carcasses Nevertheless, in succeeding months, it has become clear that the tide of poaching in the national parks, particularly of elephants, has not appreciably been stemmed. Mounds of carcasses still appear, and public concern over the situation has not abated. Leakey's outburst may finally have borne its most important fruit last month when he got a chance to take full charge of correcting the ills he has complained about. The government appointed him to replace Olindo as the man directly responsible for protecting Kenya's wildlife.
19890629000000000	OUTDOOR NOTES; DFG PRODUCES 31 WARDENS IN FIRST GRADUATING CLASS. They filed onto a stage to a recording of "Pomp and Circumstance" to receive their diplomas, but this was a different kind of June graduation. Instead of gowns, they wore forest green uniforms. Instead of mortarboards, they wore side arms. These were the 31 graduates of the first class of wardens fully trained by the California Department of Fish and Game. They completed 20 weeks -- 22 weeks for the 13 women -- of the normal intensive schooling at the Napa Valley College Police Academy, plus 400 hours of special fish, wildlife and environmental indoctrination. The ceremonies were held June 16 at the California Maritime Academy in Vallejo, where the students were housed. Although they still must serve three months of probation with veteran wardens in the field, each is not only fully qualified in law enforcement, with expertise in 70 different firearms and the Vehicle Code, but can tell a salmon from a salamander and when wildlife habitat is being abused. Or, as class coordinator Greg Cook said with a demonstration of duck calls, "They now know the difference between the soft whistle of a pintail and the loud quack of a mallard." Previously, candidate wardens were placed at whichever police schools were convenient, whenever one was needed, and got their specialized field training on the job. With this class, the DFG still will have only 374 wardens to patrol the whole state and its offshore marine jurisdictions, but the attitude seems to be one of harder resolve. The class called itself the Poacher Pinchers. Class president Salvatore Amato of Wilton, Conn., said: "A new generation of wardens. Before we could become game wardens, we had to become cops." DFG Director Pete Bontadelli, who swore them in, called them "our thin green line." There doesn't seem to be much question about their dedication. All were required to have two years of college, were paid $1,900 a month during training and will start as low as $2,036, with steps up to $2,437 over three years. All are also qualified to work, say, for the California Highway Patrol, which pays about 28% better. "I took a $900 pay cut to work for the Department of Fish and Game," said Jonathan Willcox of Downey, as his wife Karen sighed audibly. Willcox, tops in the class, has a degree in wildlife management from Humboldt State but also wanted to be a policeman. He quit his job with the Gardena police force to take the DFG course because, he said, "It's more than just the money." Willcox has been assigned to the patrol boat Yellowtail out of Oxnard. The female wardens were required to take two extra weeks of initial physical training, and two dropped out of the rigorous course. Eva Marie Schultz of San Juan Capistrano -- 5 feet 4 inches tall -- was tops in weaponless defense, and Christina Barnes of San Luis Obispo was most knowledgeable in the Fish and Game Code. Schultz will be based in Long Beach, Barnes in West Sacramento. The new program was made possible by an increase in the training budget from $300,000 to $800,000 under Bontadelli, who pointed out the necessity of special preparation. "Most of the time they'll be out alone in areas where they have no backups, and 70% of their contacts will be dealing with armed people," Bontadelli said. He hopes to have at least one full class a year. The International Game Fish Assn. is revising and expanding its all-tackle world record program by opening it to freshwater and saltwater species not currently on its record lists and by reviewing well-documented applications for past catches that exceed current listings. Catches not included on the IGFA's list of 157 species must be in accordance with the IGFA angling rules and world-record requirements. Applications for possible record catches made in the past must include as much information as possible, including a photograph and positive verification of the weight of the fish and the method of catch. The Nevada Department of Wildlife says the killing of birds of prey for their body parts has reached epidemic proportions in that state and other parts of the country. Cliff Jett, supervising game warden for the department, said that there have been cases where hundreds of raptor carcasses have been discovered by investigators. Talons of hawks have been found swinging from cars' rear-view mirrors, the feathers of golden eagles hanging from hatbands and, in one instance, the head of a great horned owl was found "adorning a living room coffee table." It is not known how many of Nevada's raptors are killed each year, but Jett said: "We do know that quite a bit of illegal traffic is taking place across the nation." Possession of birds of prey or their body parts, even if taken from a road kill, is illegal and anyone with information about possession or trafficking of such birds or their parts is asked to notify the authorities. Briefly The Department of Fish and Game has been unloading more catchable-size trout than usual in Mono County lakes because of low production from the wells providing water to the Fish Springs Hatchery. It means fewer fish will be available later in the summer. Also, Black Rock Hatchery has been under siege by white pelicans, cutting the crop about in half. The birds descend by the dozens on the open ponds until workers chase them away every morning. . . . Angler-author Ronnie Kovach's second and last instructional session on freshwater fishing in California is scheduled tonight, 7-10 p.m., at Cerritos College. Californians Larry Hopper of Santa Ana, Mike Reynolds of Modesto, Dan Leichty of Arnold and Al Layton of Parker Dam, qualified to compete among 43 weekend bass anglers for the $100,000 first prize in Operation Bass' Red Man All-American tournament Friday and Saturday at Little Rock, Ark. . . . California Angler magazine's inshore fishing school, featuring advice on how to catch local species, will be held July 22 from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at Harbor Town Hotel in Ventura. Information: (714) 261-9779. The Southern Council of Conservation Clubs will conduct a bighorn sheep census Saturday through Tuesday. Those interested may phone (213) 598-5158. . . . The Eastern Sierra Bowmen will have their first Family Fun Shoot Saturday and Sunday at the Sherwin Creek campground in Mammoth Lakes. They'll be firing at 28 three-dimensional targets. Entry fees are $25 for a family, $19 a couple and $12 for singles. . . . The U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary will have two eight-week courses on "Boating Skills and Seamanship" starting on July 5 and 6, 7:30 p.m., at the Newport Harbormaster, 1901 Bayside Dr., Newport Beach. Classes are free except for the cost of materials. Information: (714) 675-9582 or (714) 581-5568. Alaska wildlife officials and lodge owners say the oil spill in Prince William Sound should not affect fishing or bird shooting at two of the state's important locations: Bristol Bay and Katchemack Bay. According to the report, only 700 of Alaska's 35,000 miles of coastline have been affected. . . . The Project Mexico Fisherman's Fiesta, a release-only tournament to benefit orphanages and the needy children of Baja California, will be held July 31-Aug. 4 at Rancho Buena Vista Resort at Baja's East Cape region, about 50 miles north of Cabo San Lucas. Information: (818) 305-1517.
19890718000000000	WORLD; KENYA BURNS IVORY IN PLEA FOR BAN. Kenya burned 12 tons of ivory worth more than $3 million today in a gesture symbolizing its commitment to protecting the African elephant. Kenya is leading a campaign for a global ban of the ivory trade, and the bonfire was a message to poachers of elephants that it considers the ivory market closed. President Daniel Arap Moi, who set alight the ivory in Nairobi's national park, branded the act as a historic effort aimed at preventing a "terrible environmental tragedy -- the extinction of Africa's elephant." Most of the ivory burned had been confiscated by the government from poachers, who have cut Kenya's elephant herd to 17,000 from more than 65,000 a decade ago.
19890828000000000	ADAMSON REMEMBERED; 'BORN FREE' MOVEMENT: THE WORK GOES ON. It wasn't as if George Adamson, Kenya's recently slain "Grand Old Man of the Bush," didn't know about the increasing dangers from poachers stalking wildlife. Adamson, whose success at returning rehabilitated lions to the wild inspired the film "Born Free," had been repeatedly urged to leave the Kora National Reserve where he was murdered last week, according to Kim Ellis, one of the prime encouragers. A Los Angeles native who was visiting her parents in Brentwood at the time of Adamson's death, Ellis has worked in Africa with Adamson and his colleague Tony Fitzjohn since 1985. Packing to return to Africa as she talked, Ellis pointed out that attitudes toward conservationists in Kenya had become increasingly hostile. By 1980, the Kenya government, which once supported Adamson's work, "could no longer accept his lion rehabilitation program -- it was no longer a priority." But even so, Adamson, 83, steadfastly remained at Kora, monitoring the lions he had previously returned to the wild and working with three lions there in the last year. After his lion program officially ended, Adamson had helped to set up a nearby leopard rehabilitation project run by Tony Fitzjohn, his closest colleague for the last 18 years. But by 1986, the government had also "closed down" the leopard camp, Ellis lamented, and native herdsmen had begun moving into the reserve, burning acres of bush, bringing livestock into areas where lions and leopards freely roamed and poisoning those that got too close to their herds. Thus, Adamson had urged Ellis and Fitzjohn to establish a new camp at a reserve on friendlier turf. And they did -- the Mkomazi Game Reserve in Northern Tanzania, where the government declared the rehabilitation of wildlife to be a "priority national project." Adamson had not yet seen the group's new, 1,300-square-mile reserve, said Ellis, but he had planned to move there with them when things at Kora became "intolerable." As for why he didn't leave, she speculated that he felt his work was still at Kora, where both his late brother and some of his favorite lions were buried. "Whether the government stopped protecting the land (at Kora) is hard to say. It just stopped working," Ellis emphasized, adding that she's not sure what will become of the reserve now that its leader is gone. "I don't know if they'll close it up. It depends on what the government decides." For the last nine months, Ellis has been in Southern California raising funds for the TonyFitzjohn/George Adamson African Wildlife Preservation Trust. She headed back to Africa Friday to attend Adamson's funeral at Kora early this week and then to return to the camp in Tanzania. On the bed in the elegant Brentwood home of her parents sat supplies that will allow her to continue to live and work in the bush. And, for company, there was a copy of Larry King's autobiography and Wolfgang Puck's "Modern French Cooking." While Adamson's murderers were presumed to be Somali robbers and poachers by those who witnessed the incident, Ellis claimed that there was little point in comparing his death to that of gorilla researcher Dian Fossey or others thought to have been killed by poachers. "George never did anything to antagonize people," she said. "I think 99.9% of the people in the area adored George. He was the St. Francis of the animals there." While some have wondered why Adamson would continue driving toward a pickup truck that was being robbed by armed men, Ellis reasoned that Adamson undoubtedly presumed that those in the truck were visitors en route to his camp. But, before Adamson could help them, he and two members of his staff were gunned down by men wielding automatic rifles. One member of Adamson's staff jumped out of the vehicle, survived and relayed the story to reporters. "I don't think he (Adamson) was foolhardy. There's only one road there and what was he going to do? He was very brave. Was he supposed to back up and race back to camp, leaving those people endangered? I'm not surprised he did it. I think he was very brave doing it," Ellis insisted. She noted that a standard procedure at Adamson's Kora National Reserve was to drive the four miles from their camp to the airstrip after hearing the sounds of an airplane arriving. In the four years that Ellis has spent with Adamson and Fitzjohn in the bush, the three had never directly encountered poachers. "Often, we would come across poached elephants," she recalled in a slight European accent, acquired from the time she spent studying in Europe and from living near Adamson, a native of India who grew up in England, and with Fitzjohn, who is from London. "But even when the nomadic herdsmen were there, George wouldn't go over and curse them out." "There was nothing not to love (about Adamson)," remembered actress Ali MacGraw, who once stayed with Adamson and Fitzjohn at Kora and filmed a documentary about their work there. "George Adamson had a very powerful presence and commitment to the planet. . . . The way he and animals interacted spoke for itself. . . . My feeling about Tony and Kim is that they have enormous courage (to carry on Adamson's work)." Earlier this year, MacGraw became chairman of the Mkomazi Project, an endeavor Ellis and Fitzjohn will undertake to rehabilitate African wild dogs, cheetahs and other endangered species in northern Tanzania. Among other things, MacGraw narrated a documentary for the cause. And, at a May fund-raiser at Morton's restaurant, she urged other celebrities and supporters of the project to donate funds.
19891007000000000	NAMIBIANS SAY THEY ARE SLOWING ILLICIT IVORY TRADE. Conservation officials in Namibia believe they are beginning to stem a surge in the illicit ivory trade that followed the withdrawal of South African troops under a U.N.-sponsored independence plan. They scored their latest success Sept. 16 when police smashed a major international smuggling syndicate after months of investigation, arresting 25 suspects. Officials seized 980 elephant tusks, weighing about seven tons and valued at nearly $2 million, in what they believe was Africa's biggest haul of illegal ivory. "This is the biggest haul made in Africa," said Col. Johan Meintjies, head of the police diamond and narcotics squad, which also investigates poaching, after the raid in the farming town of Okahandja, 43 miles north of Windhoek. The tusks were found hidden behind a load of vegetables in a refrigerated truck. "These tusks came from more than 500 elephants, but we believe most of them were from animals killed in countries either to the north or the northeast of us," Brian Jones, a spokesman for the Department of Nature Conservation, told Reuters.  South Africa Police Help Gerhard Roux, spokesman for the South African administrator-general of Namibia, Louis Pienaar, said: "It was with the assistance of the South African police that the police in Namibia were able to achieve this result." Environmentalists say ivory is smuggled from Angola, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe by way of Namibia or Botswana. It is then shipped to Taiwan and Hong Kong for processing. Some of the men detained in the raid could face 10 years in jail under penalties that have been tightened since the latest poaching spate began. Poaching has increased this year since the number of South African forces in Namibia was reduced under the U.N. independence plan for the huge desert territory, which had been ruled by Pretoria since World War I. Since July only 1,500 South Africa troops have remained in Namibia, confined to two bases in the north under the U.N. plan. Police say poachers had previously been deterred by the South Africans, who were trying to prevent infiltration from Angola by pro-independence guerrillas of the South West Africa People's Organization.  Smugglers Watched Before the latest arrests, police had followed the smugglers through Namibia from Rundu, a small town on the Angolan border in the northeast, watching them since July 16. "We waited until we thought we had the biggest and most fish before we pounced," said Meintjies. Rundu, on the Kavango River, has been a conduit for ivory from Angola and arms supplies to the rebel movement there, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola. The area on either side of the river teems with elephants and other game, now threatened by poachers. Some of the seized elephant tusks were huge, weighing as much as 80 pounds, while others were tiny, taken from baby elephants. Police also seized 14 rhinoceros horns and a few hippopotamus teeth. Conservationists fear that one of Namibia's most precious resources, its abundant wildlife and especially its threatened black rhinoceros, faces a major menace from poaching. "Since July this year we have captured at least 80 poachers," police Chief Inspector Kierie du Rand said. In some areas the police are using former bush fighters from Koevoet -- the now disbanded counter-insurgency unit -- to hunt the ivory dealers. Namibian police say the anti-poaching units have had a marked effect. But the South West Africa People's Organization opposes the use of the units, saying all former Koevoet members should be banned from police duty because they intimidate SWAPO supporters.
19900330000000000	ETHNIC SOMALIS CHAFE UNDER OFFICIAL SCRUTINY IN KENYA; EAST AFRICA: A FLOOD OF REFUGEES AND ARMED MARAUDERS FROM ACROSS THE BORDER PROMPTS NAIROBI TO CHECK FOR CITIZENSHIP.. It was not very long ago that members of this country's sizable ethnic Somali community believed that years of discrimination and harassment by the black African majority had come to an end. "Things were better than (at) any time in memory," said one prominent Somali here. No more. Angered by a flood of refugees and a surge of armed attacks by marauders from across its long border with Somalia, the Kenyan government has lately subjected its ethnic Somalis to an unprecedented "screening" exercise in which they are required to prove their Kenyan citizenship. The exercise has created a political uproar here. Kenyan Somalis say they are victims of petty harassment that is as bad as it has ever been. The issue has split the Somali community. The screening has been supervised by prominent Kenyan Somali politicians and bureaucrats, leading some to suggest that they are intent on deporting members of opposition tribes or clans to promote their own. Also, the exercise comes at a time of unprecedented misery for Somalis in general. A heightening civil war in Somalia has sent thousands of people across the borders of that stricken country into Kenya and Djibouti. Human rights groups have charged both countries with mistreating the refugees. One group, Africa Watch, charged that in September, the Kenyan authorities returned 60 Somali refugees to their own country at gunpoint. The report contends that 18 of the refugees were executed by Somali soldiers and 42 imprisoned. Originally expected to last three weeks, or until the end of December, the screening process was extended until April. Under the rules, all ethnic Somalis over 18 are required to bring their national identity cards, passports and birth certificates for verification by panels of Somali elders at any of 51 "screening centers." Those who pass muster are issued a pink identification card that must be produced on demand. Kenyan authorities say 71 people "suspected to be citizens of Somalia" have been arrested, and sources in the government and the Somali community here say as many as 500 allegedly illegal aliens have been deported to Somalia. Among those deported were leading Nairobi businessmen, a former official of the ruling party, the Kenya African National Union, even a former member of Parliament. Some held official citizenship or residence documents that were summarily declared to be forgeries. None of these deportations were preceded by due process, as provided for in the Kenyan constitution. "In our country, a person is innocent until proven guilty," says Mohammed Ibrahim, a Kenyan Somali lawyer. "Nobody has been prosecuted or charged in a court of law. So on the facts we have, the Kenya government has deported 500 of its own citizens." Others who have registered protests include the Kenya section of the International Commission of Jurists and the Law Society of Kenya. Among ethnic Somalis who initially refused to submit to the screening was Ahmed Khalif, a former member of Parliament and head of the Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims. In response, the council stripped him of his post. Kenya has long seen itself as a multi-ethnic, multiracial community, but the authorities seem to have always made an exception for ethnic Somalis. Thousands of these people are second- and third-generation Kenyans with Kenyan citizenship and passports. People of Somali background, whose dark olive skin and Caucasian features distinguish them physically from African Kenyans, say they are often singled out by police on the street. "If you are Somali-looking, the police will stop you and ask to see your documents," says one prominent businessman who resides legally in Kenya as a political refugee. "It happens as often as you come across a policeman -- at least one or two times a week." The distaste of Kenyan authorities for ethnic Somalis goes back to the eve of independence in 1963. In 1961, the British attached part of the former Italian Somaliland to its Kenya colony; it became part of Kenya upon independence in 1963. The Somalis began a war of secession, which lasted until 1967, when the government of Somalia withdrew its support. But the state of emergency imposed during the unrest has never been lifted. The so-called North-Eastern province has been troublesome ever since. In recent years the waxing and waning of civil war in neighboring Somalia has periodically sent tens of thousands of refugees into the region, along with hundreds of marauders known as shiftas, or bandits. As the shiftas graduated from bows and arrows in the '60s and '70s to automatic weapons and motorized carriers, security in the region deteriorated. Eventually, the shiftas moved into elephant poaching, a crime that the Kenyans at one point traced directly to agents of Somali President Mohamed Siad Barre. The poaching and a surge in armed attacks on tourists in Kenyan game parks, allegedly by Somali bandits, provoked the government to order the screening. So many alien Somalis had crossed the border to escape the civil war, the government said, that Kenya's Somali population was overrun. The difficulty of telling a Kenyan Somali from an alien, it argued, made the screening necessary.
19900422000000000	GIANT PANDAS THREATENED BY INBREEDING. The recent discovery of a way to speed up bamboo flowering, hailed as the salvation of the giant panda, was a waste of effort, according to a Chinese expert who says inbreeding could be the end of the endangered animals. Indian researchers announced in March that they had developed a revolutionary process to cause bamboo, the panda's only food source, to flower and produce seeds decades earlier than its normal life cycle. Normally, bamboo flowers only once in its lifetime, after growing from 12 to 120 years. The flowering takes place in an entire grove and, when it is over, the whole grove dies. In 1983, some Chinese scientists raised the alarm that pandas were in imminent danger of starvation after a large grove of arrow bamboo flowered and died in the Wolong panda reserve in Sichuan province, in China's southwest. Wolong is one of six panda reserves, holding about 400 of the world's estimated 1,500 pandas living in the wild -- all in China. Western scientists had cheered the speedier regeneration of bamboo forests as spelling salvation for the pandas. But Pan Wenshi of Beijing University, one of the world's foremost authorities on pandas, said the animals were never in danger of starving. "There has never been a bamboo shortage for the pandas," Pan said. "Even if one species flowered and died, the pandas always had plenty of other species they could eat. "The development of the speedier bamboo growth process was a waste of time and effort," the biologist said. An official of the Forestry Ministry, responsible for protecting pandas, said he believed the animals would have to migrate to find food when an entire grove of bamboo died. "But I do not think the food situation is dire," the official said. He could not comment on the newly discovered bamboo growing process. Pan said that not only was the new process unnecessary to the pandas' survival, it went against nature. "When a bamboo forest dies, other plants can grow in their stead. That is the natural way, the way it should be." Pandas, which in prehistoric times ranged virtually across China from Beijing to China's extreme south, have shrunk in numbers at the approach of man. "Man is crowding the pandas out," said the Forestry Ministry official. The pandas' main sanctuary, Sichuan, is China's most populous province, with 100 million people. Even under optimum conditions, the animals have an uphill battle to survive. Their life span is only 12 years, and their reproductive period is brief. Zoologists say a giant panda couple produce on average only 0.6 offspring. Poaching and pollution have taken their toll on the bear-like black-and-white creatures. But Pan contends that the biggest enemy of the panda, worse than man, is inbreeding. There are only small concentrations of pandas in each of the six reserves, and even smaller numbers are of breeding age. "We're seeing a very small gene pool, with weak panda babies being born -- many of whom eventually die," Pan said. Pan and other researchers want to try to move male pandas around from one region to another to widen the gene pool and ensure stronger panda offspring. "If we don't do anything, at this rate there could be no more pandas in another 30 years," he said.
19900624000000000	OUT OF ATHERTON; THE DARK ROMANCE OF DIAN FOSSEY BY HAROLD T. P. HAYES (SIMON & SHUSTER: $21.95; 384 PP.; 0-671-6339-2). They put her in a cage with the other whites, and then one by one the men were taken out and slaughtered. She was raped repeatedly, but somehow through force of will survived, got out of the Congo and made it to Uganda, and finally Rwanda. She had been studying gorillas for six months in a freezing rain forest, living alone except for a few thieving African helpers. She buried this incident, only briefly alluding to it later under rare circumstances; buried it so that she would not be recalled by her sponsors, so that she could continue the study that became "Gorillas in the Mist," the book and the movie. That is the Dian Fossey of story and legend. Or, this never really happened, as some believe, including her then-fiance, Alexie Forrester, an old Africa hand and a man not likely to underestimate the continent's capacity for barbarism or succumb easily to stories that do not quite add up. The late Harold T. Hayes in his biography, "The Dark Romance of Dian Fossey," must grapple with a lot of stories that may or may not add up, but as he wends his way through the various accounts (the book is based on more than 200 interviews) including Fossey's own talent for fabrication, he keeps his eye on one thing: Dian Fossey, the extraordinary woman who more than any other single person brought mountain gorillas into the conciousness of the world. Those who have read Farley Mowat's uncritical biography, "Woman of the Mists," are in for a kind of jolt -- the same characters and incidents occur but with a completely different interpretation. Also, the warm Dian Fossey of her journals and letters is largely absent here -- whether for legal reasons that limit use of such material, or for other reasons, it is hard to say. What stands out in both books is a very powerful human being. She was a person who could nurse and sleep with orphaned infant gorillas, the diarrhea from the sick youngsters gushing across her, ignore her rotting teeth and swollen jaw, fight off African poachers as a witch, start letter wars with European zoos, work without salary while living on potatoes, chain-smoke as she struggled up 10,000-foot peaks, and in one year make 485 hours of observations of mountain gorillas (versus renowned scholar George Schaller's 466 in 18 months). All this accomplished in an environment where a strapping American male assistant went from 195 to 145 pounds in about three months, and then left the region entirely. She was a piece of work, and this book tells us as much as we are likely to learn about how she got the way she was. It is compelling, disturbing, and for those who dream of renown and rewards without the pain of earning them a useful corrective. She was born in California to a fashion model mother and a father, who after a divorce had no contact with her until she was an adult. Her stepfather was rich, and she was reared comfortably in Atherton. Over six feet tall, she had little sense of selfesteem, became a therapist and fled her family for a position working with handicapped children in Louisville, Ky., a deadend job where she stayed 10 years. She lived alone in the woods, took in stray dogs and seemed to never have a man in her life. By her mid-30s, she sensed some kind of emptiness, and though engaged to Rhodesian Alexie Forrester, pitched herself to Louis Leakey as another Jane Goodall, and by Jan. 1, 1967, was high on the mountain studying gorillas. She had no background in the sciences, was not a naturalist, knew little of Africa, was physically unfit, and lacked any talent whatsoever for dealing with people of other cultures. And of course, in the end she succeeded. In this age of bloated biographies of virtual nonentities, Hayes has produced a bare-bones text crammed with significant incidents and one that refrains from psychobabble as a form of explanation. And Fossey is the kind of person who would tempt any one to produce some kind of explanation for her behavior. Although there are clues from her childhood (abandoned by her natural father, hostile to her stepfather, convinced of her unattractiveness) her coldness and fear of getting close to people, the physical facts of her life in Africa would produce either an iron will or total breakdown in many people. The national park she lived in was 25 miles by four miles, and set in Rwanda, which is one of the most overpopulated nations in the world with 600 people per square mile. When she arrived, the 400 mountain gorillas were tottering on the lip of extinction, and when she died in 1985, a little more than 200 remained and the park had shrunk. Choosing intimate contact with the gorillas over the calm, objective viewing of them (to the continuing consternation of many scientists), she gradually became accepted by the various groups, formed what looks like friendships with individuals such as the famous Digit, and finally was able to sit inside the groups and move with them, be touched by them, seemingly to be accepted by them -- much of this captured on film by the great love of her life, Bob Campbell. And while her research continued, the gorillas were slaughtered by poachers stealing infants for European zoos (in one period in 1948, 60 gorillas died protecting 11 infants seized for zoos), by natives seeking skulls for collectors, and by her neighbors apparently outraged by her brutal behavior toward them. She threatened them with black magic, had their genitals flogged with stinging nettles, shot their cattle, kidnaped their children, and sought to have poachers killed on sight. By 1979, she was writing letters such as this one to the American ambassador in Rwanda: "It is only a matter for the President to give the order -- KILL -- (because) the prisons are already overcrowded and this is the only way we are going to be able to protect the remaining gorillas." Nor was she much kinder to the various researchers and helpers that flocked from around the world to join her in her work. The book is littered with former friends now enemies. And of course, in late December, 1985, she was slaughtered in her cabin on the mountain by a person or persons unknown. They made her grave in her gorilla cemetary where she had buried her friends like Digit. Hayes doesn't solve her murder, but he does leave one with the feeling that it hardly matters -- a lot of people had reason to hate Fossey, and by the time of her death, drinking heavily, her lungs shot from smoking, she didn't seem to like herself much either. This is hardly a debunking biography or an expose but it does make us face the fact that people we admire may not be people we would like had we met them. I doubt that it will be the last word on this remarkable person, but it certainly is the most searing. She has been a legend, a movie, books and a cause. Now she is made flesh. Fossey did a great thing and paid a great price -- her loneliness at times is almost unbearable. She drew our attention not just to gorillas but to possibilities of other forms of life. No one who reads this book will likely forget her sitting in the forest with two blond-haired little girls while a gorilla strokes their locks with amazement. I certainly won't.
19900820000000000	TV REVIEWS; TNT'S 'LAST ELEPHANT' HAS WRENCHING EFFECT. Ivory ornaments are slaughtered elephants. That's the theme -- and the wrenching visual impact -- of the strongly cast fictional film, "The Last Elephant" (TNT cable today at 5 p.m., 7 p.m., 9 p.m. and 11 p.m., with encore broadcasts Tuesday and next weekend). Shot in Nairobi and the wildlife bush country of Kenya, with Joseph Sargent directing a cast featuring John Lithgow, Isabella Rossellini and James Earl Jones, the production is the National Audubon Society's first effort to expand its environmental message beyond the documentary format. As an entertainment, with murderous poachers, corrupt ivory traffickers and a cynical, alcoholic adventure novelist (Lithgow) who finds mystery and purpose in Africa, "The Last Elephant" is a radical departure for Audubon Society Productions. And a smart leap: You won't watch the staged but realistic massacre of a herd of elephants by ax-wielding, AK-47-bearing poachers from neighboring Somalia and Burundi and easily slip on ivory jewelry or feel the same way about the ivories on a piano. The movie doesn't pound you with facts, but there's an urgency here: bloody mutilation has cut the African elephant population in half in the last decade and in Kenya the number of elephants has plummeted from 70,000 to 18,000. In Richard Guttman and Bill Bozzone's script, from a story by Bradley T. Winter, the dialogue is brushed with telling images. "If man allows the beast to die, man's spirit will die of loneliness" becomes an unusually poignant line because it's translated from Swahili and uttered by an aging Masai tribal chief (not an actor). Elsewhere, the writers deftly dramatize thematic points. Jones, playing a Nairobi police inspector, has such a great voice that he can, of course, make any line of dialogue tremble. Gazing at an elephant family of sisters, grandmothers, babies, he asks, "When will they learn to distrust us?" Rossellini's field researcher remarks more bluntly, "Elephants are cursed fugitives in their own territory." Forgetting the story's conventional, action-filled, romance-filled ending, the film's import is that it recalls arguably the greatest narrative prose ever written about the elephant (and collapsing colonial empires): George Orwell's unforgettable autobiographical essay (from his Burmese days), "Shooting the Elephant."Ray Loynd
19920229000000000	FT  29 FEB 92 / Elephants and ivory: the battle that is being won. THE PLIGHT of the African elephant arouses high passions. Hunted down and stripped of tusks and hide by poachers, their numbers in Africa slumped from 1.2m to 600,000 in a decade until, in 1989, CITES - the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species - banned the trade in ivory. On Monday, when the CITES' 12-day triennial conference begins in Kyoto, Japan, the wound will be re-opened. Zimbabwe, South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Malawi want the buying and selling of ivory and other elephant products to resume in order to generate funds for protection and preservation. They claim that effective management of native elephant herds has meant that populations are flourishing, and Zimbabwe even says culling may be needed to reduce numbers. But conservationists fear that ending the ban will mean a new wave of poaching, which could have drastic effects on nations to the north. The debate will be stormy. Here, IAIN DOUGLAS-HAMILTON, who has been battling for 25 years to protect the world's largest land animal, explains the background to the meeting - and the problems that continue to make a lasting solution so difficult. IN SEPTEMBER 1991, two years after the CITES' ivory ban, a multi-national team in nine light aircraft criss-crossed Kenya's Tsavo national park - a wilderness of red earth, thorn bush and blue, faraway hills - looking for elephants. Over five days, scanning every corner of the 43,000 sq km park, 6,800 live animals were spotted - up 9 per cent since the last count. Even more important was the near-total absence of fresh carcasses. Tsavo had been ravaged by poachers and ivory traders. But now, morale was soaring. Corrupt park staff had gone and the new warden was a true professional with properly-equipped forces which had confronted and defeated the intruders. There were still plenty of armed men pouring into Kenya as the civil war in Somalia raged to the north, but the trading ban meant that ivory was devalued and not worth the risks any more. It was a far different story only a few years earlier. After a brief golden age for elephants in the 1950s and '60s, following the post-Second World War establishment of national parks, a wave of poaching had spread from east Africa, driven by the high ivory price and the demand for trinkets and name stamps in far-off Japan, Europe and the United States. The poaching extended far west through the equatorial forests and south to the Zambezi river. Flying over Uganda in 1980, after the fall of dictator Idi Amin, we found a holocaust. Elephants lay littered on the trails like crumpled leaves, the wounded dragging their legs as they struggled to keep up with the terrified herds. In the Murchison Falls national park, there were only 2,300 survivors from 14,000 elephants in the 1960s. There were gun battles in the parks as the authorities sought to deal with the aggressive, heavily-armed poachers. Rangers were killed by Sudanese army poachers in Kidepo until a determined campaign drove them out. Bodies of dead poachers were left to be eaten by hyenas. The problems of Uganda were mirrored time and again elsewhere. Collecting information, with the help of scientific colleagues across Africa, we found evidence of elephants speared, trapped, poisoned, burned or shot down with automatic fire. At times, we came close to despair at the failure of one initiative after another to stop the slaughter. The only exceptions to the general trend were in southern Africa, south of the Zambezi. But we feared the poaching inevitably would spread south, given the high world demand for ivory. Finally, in 1989, the sheer weight of evidence of abuse convinced African governments and Western publics to back the ivory trade ban. And, in general, there has been an improvement. Contrary to predictions, it has proved policeable. In most countries, the ivory price has dropped followed by a rapid decrease in poaching. This is especially true in the parks and reserves of east Africa, once affected most seriously. But at next week's CITES' conference in Kyoto, five southern African nations want to re-open trading. It is a move opposed strongly by most African countries to the north, which believe it would destroy their elephants. The traders sitting on stock-piles of ivory poached before the ban would benefit the most, as any legal trade would send up the price. It would also be impossible to prevent the mixing of legal and illegal stocks. A possible compromise would be for the southern African countries to agree not to trade in ivory and to confine trade to meat and skins; but there are fears this would not be sufficiently binding. And yet, the southern African countries, by giving up ivory sales over the past two years, have borne some of the cost of keeping elephants alive elsewhere in Africa. Their altruistic action has saved heavier costs in human and elephant lives, and money, that would have been incurred by nations to the north. But for northern countries - in particular, Kenya - keeping the ivory ban is a matter of economic survival. There is no way it could cope with another surge in poaching. Despite Kenya and Zimbabwe being at either end of the spectrum, they have common interests. Both believe the way forward will include an economic programme to make wildlife self-sustaining. Zimbabwe, with its 'camp-fire' programme, has pioneered projects to bring money to local people from tourism, hunting and cropping exercises. Kenya has made great strides in doubling its wildlife-based tourist revenues, although this is being damaged at present by bandit attacks on visitors to game reserves. At the heart of the problem is a difference in philosophy between the protectionist and utilisation lobbies. The arguments have been bitter at times and represent a real clash of ideas. The tragedy has been that conservationists on either side of the ivory divide have fought each other rather than the illegal traders who were the real enemy. On the other hand, the matter of culling has now clouded the argument. Although it is a repellent business, no one has yet come up with a solution for over-population of elephants - something that is becoming an issue as numbers grow. And whether you like it or not, culling is a sovereign right of each country with elephants. But a recent meeting of African elephant range states at the United Nations Environment Programme revealed a distinctly encouraging mood. There is a growing sense of collaboration between African states and a growing willingness on the part of major donors, such as the US, the European Community and its individual member-states, to fund elephant programmes within their aid packages. A united African initiative to resolve the thorny question of the ivory trade would be better than any Western-led solution, however well-intentioned. An African compromise which keeps the ivory trade shut indefinitely would be worth the price of some nations selling skins from properly-controlled culling operations. Ultimately, the fate of elephants lies in the hands of the African peoples themselves. Iain Douglas-Hamilton is adviser to the European Commission on its elephant survey and conservation programme. He has also worked for the World Wildlife Fund and for the New York Zoological Society. Together with his wife, Oira, he has written the book Battle for the Elephants (Doubleday, Pounds 17.99).
19920919000000000	FT  19 SEP 92 / Travel: A safari that ends on the beach - Richard Gilbert divides his Kenyan holiday between the luxurious game lodges of Tsavo and the Indian Ocean. THE DELICATELY laundered white mosquito net around my bed made the room look like a bridal suite. I ordered a beer. As I quenched a thirst brought on by a morning game drive in the bush, I glanced through the window and counted eight zebra, five water-buck and nine elephants heading towards a water-hole. It was early February in Kenya's Tsavo national park and the temperature had not dropped below 93'c Fahrenheit all day. Tsavo, halfway between Mombasa and Nairobi, is the largest game sanctuary in East Africa. Thirty-six hours earlier we had struggled through fog to Gatwick; now we were outbidding each other with sightings of exotic animals. This was my first two-centre holiday - a week divided between the comforts of an Indian Ocean beach hotel outside Mombasa and game rides into the bush of Tsavo and the Taita Hills private game sanctuary. Seven of us climbed on to a safari mini-bus for a game drive to Salt Lick Lodge, a sanctuary in the Taita Hills that was once a sisal plantation. The success of any game drive depends largely on the skills, prescience and character of the driver-guide. With Hamid, we were lucky. Off the Mombasa-Nairobi highway, Hamid turned the zebra- striped Nissan down red dirt tracks surrounded by thorn scrub and short grass. He could interpret the significance of a lump of animal dung or a patch of smoothed-down grass with tremendous skill. Following trails and tracks, we saw giraffes, gazelles, zebra, dikdik and exotic birds that would have driven twitchers into a frenzy. The game park lodges for overnight accommodation are a misnomer, having less to do with Karen Blixen than with Conrad Hilton. Indeed, Salt Lick Safari Lodge in Taita Hills is owned by Hilton. Built around a natural salt lick, the clusters of rooms are on pillars to let the animals wander freely underneath the lodge. At dawn we set off north for Tsavo, once notorious for man-eating lions and more recently for the Somali poachers who have plundered the black rhino population. Just when you think the views are unsurpassable, you reach Voi Lodge in Tsavo East. Built on an escarpment, the lodge overlooks a remarkable series of linked water holes. From my room I watched the gigantic amphitheatre fill with dozens of elephants, their hides rusted from rolling in the red earth around the water holes. Waking at first light the following day, I disentangled myself from the mosquito net and watched the continuing parade of wildlife, headed this time by water buffalo and ostriches. The morning was still cool; the scent of wild flowers filled the lodge. The last lap of the safari took us to Tsavo West national park, with a detour past Mzima Springs from where millions of gallons of crystal water are piped daily to Mombasa. This oasis, surrounded by a valley of arid lava, is a haven for hippos. On the rough track to Ngulia Lodge, an inspired diversion by Hamid took us to a pride of lions in a broad patch of long grass. Two new-born cubs romped with elder members of the family; then, seeking a feed, they were gently cuffed away by a lioness. Ngulia Lodge, in Tsavo West, is a mecca for migrating birds. The lights of the isolated lodge attract hundreds of species, and there is a roll-call of rare visitors. Madagascar bee-eaters, penduline tits, hammerkops, wheatears, warblers and waders are all regulars, together with a species bearing the memorable name of 'red-cheeked cordon bleu'. Four days of safari are rewarded with a long weekend of relaxation at Safari Beach hotel outside Mombasa. How safe is a safari holiday? The sudden spate of attacks on tourists in the Masai Mara, east of Tsavo, earlier this year was unprecedented for Kenya and led to increased security. Operators are insisting on a minimum of two vehicles travelling together on particular game drives in the Mara's remoter areas. But travellers to Tsavo  -unlike the Mara, Tsavo is controlled by the Kenya Wildlife Service - have faced no difficulties. Kenya is still safer than Key West. Richard Gilbert travelled with Portland Holidays, whose 'Portrait of Kenya' combined safari and beach holidays start at Pounds 689 per person for a week (from November 1). The cost for 10 nights' beach plus four days' safari is around Pounds 823 per person (again, from Nov 1). Address: 218 Great Portland St, London W1N SHG, tel: 071-388-5111, or 1 Portland St, Manchester M1 3BJ, tel: 061-228-1188.
19930406000000000	FT  06 APR 93 / Kenya's tourist industry suffers big fall in revenue. TOURISM in Kenya dropped sharply last year, reducing hard currency revenues from the industry to Dollars 295m from Dollars 400m (Pounds 195m from Pounds 266m) in 1991, a government official said yesterday, Reuter reports from Nairobi. Mr Philemon Mwaisaka, permanent secretary at the ministry of tourism, blamed the sharp downturn in visits to safari parks or Indian Ocean beaches on reports in western countries, where most visitors come from, about attacks on tourists, tribal violence and political unrest. 'Imagined insecurity in Kenya had convinced European-based tourists that the country was not safe,' he said. The run-up to December's first multi-party polls in 26 years was marred by tribal violence. This, coupled with bandit attacks on tourists, led to a fall in hotel bookings of up to 60,000 bed-nights in the last five months of 1992, tourism officials say. Last year, some 700,000 tourists visited Kenya after a record 814,000 in 1991. But many, enticed by cheap bucket-shop deals, kept their wallets closed while in the country. Mr Mwaisaka said the government was fighting back with a vigorous campaign to revitalise the industry and woo visitors. He said security in national parks would be stepped up, more roads would be built and accommodation would be improved. 'Protection of endangered species like elephants and rhinos has received priority,' he added. 'Poaching has been reduced to almost zero and an elaborate security network put in place to ensure tourists' safety and increased comfort,' he added. The government has also begun aerial surveillance of game parks and issued advice about which areas of Nairobi are considered dangerous. Fears for the safety of tourists have been fuelled by attacks in game parks, particularly the Masai Mara reserve. Germany and the US have warned their nationals not to go to parks while Britain and Australia have cautioned against travel in parks when unaccompanied by rangers. Kenya, which rejected International Monetary Fund and World Bank-backed reforms last month, badly needs tourists to help purchase essential imports and service a Dollars 7.1bn foreign debt. President Daniel arap Moi, angered over an IMF refusal to reinstate critical balance of payments support of around Dollars 40m a month, two weeks ago called a halt to liberalisation policies and said Kenya would go its own way.
19930428000000000	FT  28 APR 93 / Business and the Environment: Preserving a profit - The owners of a Natal game reserve believe conservation can only work if it pays. Zibane Mazibuko illustrates one of Africa's rarest cliches: he is a poacher-turned-gamekeeper. Not long ago, this 33-year-old Zulu with broken teeth and ragged clothes, who speaks seldom and smiles less, was poaching game from the Phinda Resource Reserve in South Africa's Natal province. Today, he says his future depends on keeping the animals alive: for they attract the tourists who bring scarce cash to this forgotten corner of rural Zululand. Thanks to them, Mazibuko has landed a contract to make 150,000 bricks for the new Phinda game lodge; he reckons he can earn R1,800 (Pounds 370) a month from his new business, far more than he could bag as a poacher. The owners of Phinda, the South African-based Conservation Corporation, could not have paid for a better advertisement for their philosophy of wildlife conservation - a people-based approach to conservation, which is slowly gaining ground in Africa as game reserves come under ever greater threat from hungry, poor and angry local populations. Kevin Leo-Smith is manager of Phinda and a director of the Conservation Corporation. He and his colleagues - brothers Dave and John Varty, who have already made a fortune from their brand of ethically-sound conservation - believe they have found a model to guarantee the survival of wildlife in Africa. 'The old notion of a game reserve where you put up a fence and chuck the people out is flawed,' says Leo-Smith. 'You need to make sure the cash flows through that fence.' Local people must share not only the natural resources of the reserve - they must be allowed to gather wood for cooking, grasses for thatching, palm sap for wine-making and indigenous herbs for use by witch-doctors - but they must benefit from its development. 'We're aiming to use the economic 'exciter' of the lodge to attract (development and investment) funds, and make sure they get circulated locally so that local people understand that their future is invested with us - and that gives them an interest in conservation,' Leo-Smith concludes. In other words, they intend to turn all the poachers into honorary gamekeepers. The alternative, says Leo-Smith, is untenable: to live in a perpetual state of siege, keeping poachers out by force (the status quo in most other African reserves). So the motivation for Phinda is more practical than ethical: and therein lies its best chance of success. For Leo-Smith and the Vartys practise a capitalist approach to conservation. They believe conservation can and must be made to pay - especially in South Africa, where a new black government will probably divert subsidies from state reserves (widely viewed as white playgrounds) to fund black social development. Conservation Corp has raised R83m in equity funds, 40 per cent of it from foreign investors such as Hambros Bank and the Getty family trusts, to invest in Africa's undervalued wildlife assets, which they argue can be exploited to produce returns which are attractive and ethically sound. That means making not only traditional 'social investments' in surrounding communities - building schools, clinics and housing for employees - but, more importantly, providing venture capital for local businesses which must prove commercially viable to survive. Phinda's managers know charity is a poor substitute for sustainable development: they will provide management training, marketing advice, cheap loans, equity where necessary - but the entrepreneurial drive must come from the community. Mazibuko, the brickmaker, is only one of Conservation Corp's pilot entrepreneurs. When he was caught poaching, he was so poor he could not pay the fine imposed by the local tribal court: one cow, the currency of rural Zulu society. So he worked off his sentence making bricks for the reserve. Later, Phinda set him up as an independent brickmaker, with two rudimentary moulding machines and a contract for the new lodge. Phinda provides the raw materials, and passes all the profit (2 cents per brick) along to Mazibuko, after a 1 cent per brick repayment on the machinery. He pays his labourers out of profits and dreams of expansion once the lodge is built. Phinda gets bricks over a third cheaper than from commercial suppliers. Not far from Mazibuko's brickworks, Thomas Nkomo - another reformed poacher  -makes charcoal according to a traditional African method. Where before he stole wood from the reserve, now he clears unwanted bush for Phinda, and uses it to build a six-foot high circular pyre. The pyre smoulders for 17 days, yielding 800 5kg bags of highly marketable 'environmentally-friendly' charcoal. Nkomo's equity partner, a Phinda game ranger, sells the charcoal for R3.40 per bag. It costs R1.20 to produce, with costs held down further by the fact that Nkomo's labour is paid through a drought relief scheme funded by a local development agency. But if charcoal and brickmaking are at least marginally viable, Phinda's Sondela entertainment centre could prove really lucrative. Phinda sold 168 R100 shares in Sondela to finance (with the help of a R25,000 interest-free loan) a centre where, for a nominal fee, employees can enjoy soccer, karate, body building and ballroom dancing, buy take-away food and drinks and have their photo taken by a local photographer. Phinda aims to ensure that Sondela shares pay an 80 to 100 per cent annual dividend, to popularise the idea of share ownership in a hostile environment; loan repayments will be deferred until the project makes sufficient profit. Leo-Smith admits that Phinda does not put large amounts of its own money into these schemes, though he says the reserve supports 10 per cent of the local population (directly or indirectly). But Africa is littered with large and expensive development schemes which, inevitably, fail; spending small sums well, on commercially viable development - the Phinda method - is far more difficult than pouring shareholder funds into charity projects which do more for the donor's self-image than for the recipient's prosperity.
19930524000000000	FT  24 MAY 93 / Trade bans may save the whale, but not the elephant. BIO-DIVERSITY is the environmental lobby's latest buzz-word. Translated, it means the more species, the merrier. But this diversity appears to be under threat, at least according to statistics compiled by the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, which purport to show that species extinctions have risen rapidly over the past century. Humans cannot be blamed for the demise of all species, the extinction of the dinosaur being one obvious example. Let us accept, however, both that bio-diversity is worth preserving and that it is human beings who are responsible for the rise in extinctions in recent decades. What can be done to reverse the trend? The standard response, enshrined in numerous international conventions, is to ban economic exploitation of endangered species. Such a ban is the mechanism that the International Whaling Commission has used for over 40 years in its efforts to reverse the collapse in the number of blue and hump-back whales. A fortnight ago, at its 45th annual meeting, the IWC decided not to lift its ban on commercial whaling. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) hopes that by banning ivory trade it can reverse the demise of the African elephant, whose numbers halved between 1979 and 1989, implying a loss of over 700,000 elephants. The ban was imposed in 1989 and reconfirmed a year ago, despite opposition from southern African governments. Do such trade bans work? Not always, argues Mr Timothy Swanson in the latest issue of Economic Policy. A ban on commercial fishing may be an effective way of protecting threatened oceanic species from excess farming, he argues, but halting trade in elephant products is not. Whales are threatened with extinction for three reasons: they breed slowly; they are cheap to catch relative to the market price for whale products; and access is available to anyone with a boat and the necessary expertise. If access to whale farming were controlled by quotas, their numbers could theoretically be stabilised. In practice, a ban on commercial whaling is a more effective way of reducing the economic return for fishermen and thus discouraging their capture. But the success of this policy for preserving the whales depends on the assumption that, left to their own devices, whales would breed freely and flourish. The same argument does not apply to elephants, which do not have the luxury of living in huge oceans. The survival of land species, especially such large and potentially destructive animals as elephants, depends on the willingness of humans to preserve their habitat. This depends on their economic return, compared to other land uses. It is because investing in elephants has not been sufficiently profitable, at least in the poorest African states, that elephants are threatened. While the proximate cause for the decline in the number of African elephants in recent years seems to be the availability of high-power weapons and the relatively lucrative ivory trade, elephants were killed in large numbers because government did not find it profitable to stop the poachers. In the 1980s, four countries alone - Tanzania, Zambia, Zaire and Sudan - lost 750,000 elephants. All spent less than Dollars 20 a year per square kilometre on park management. Zimbabwe, by contrast, spent Dollars 194 and saw its elephant stock rise by over 20,000. Little wonder that the higher spending governments of southern Africa are arguing for the ban on the ivory trade to be lifted. Banning trade reduces the incentive for African countries to keep poachers out of the parks or to preserve elephant-friendly habitats. If African elephants are to be saved, the economic return on elephant farming must be increased, rather than lowered, perhaps by granting export quotas to countries willing to invest in keeping the poachers out. Free trade in ivory may not be environmentally friendly, but neither is a trade ban. Timothy Swanson, 'Regulating endangered species', Economic Policy 16, April 1993. Cambridge University Press.  -----------------------------------------------------------------------            INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INDICATORS: BALANCE OF PAYMENTS  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Trade figures are given in billions of European currency units (Ecu). The Ecu exchange rate shows the number of national currency units per Ecu. The nominal effective exchange rate is an index with 1985=100.  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                UNITED STATES  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                              Visible    Current      Ecu      Effective                               trade     account    exchange    exchange                   Exports    balance    balance      rate        rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985               279.8     -174.2     -159.7     0.7623       100.0 1986               230.9     -140.6     -150.0     0.9836        80.2 1987               220.2     -131.8     -141.6     1.1541        70.3 1988               272.5     -100.2     -107.0     1.1833        66.0 1989               330.2      -99.3      -91.8     1.1017        69.4 1990               309.0      -79.3      -70.9     1.2745        65.1 1991               340.5      -53.5       -3.0     1.2391        64.5 1992               345.8      -64.1      -48.2     1.2957        62.9 2nd qtr. 1992        86.8      -16.9      -14.4     1.2717        63.6 3rd qtr. 1992        80.6      -17.7      -11.4     1.3831        60.1 4th qtr. 1992        91.5      -17.4      -17.4     1.2658        64.2 1st qtr. 1993        95.8      -21.8                1.1841        66.4 May 1992            28.4       -6.0        na    1.2676        63.8 June                29.2       -5.2        na    1.3039        62.3 July                27.3       -5.5        na    1.3693        60.5 August              25.9       -6.2        na    1.4014        59.8 September           27.3       -6.0        na    1.3786        60.2 October             29.4       -5.5        na    1.3210        62.1 November            30.5       -6.3        na    1.2372        65.1 December            31.6       -5.6        na    1.2391        65.3 January 1993        31.3       -6.4        na    1.1968        66.4 February            31.4       -6.7        na    1.1767        66.7 March               33.1       -8.7        na    1.1789        66.2 April                                      na    1.2214        64.3  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                  JAPAN  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               Visible    Current     Ecu      Effective                                trade     account   exchange    exchange                   Exports     balance    balance     rate        rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985               230.8       76.0       64.5      180.50      100.0 1986               211.1       96.2       86.9      165.11      124.4 1987               197.3       86.1       75.5      166.58      133.2 1988               219.8       80.7       66.6      151.51      147.3 1989               245.3       70.5       52.4      151.87      141.9 1990               220.0       50.1       28.3      183.94      126.0 1991               247.4       83.1       62.9      166.44      137.0 1992               254.8      101.8       89.8      164.05      142.9 2nd qtr. 1992        63.9       26.1       23.1      165.60      139.9 3rd qtr. 1992        61.5       23.7       20.1      172.79      139.6 4th qtr. 1992        65.2       26.9       24.8      155.57      149.7 1st qtr. 1993        72.8       29.9       30.6      143.41      158.5 May 1992            21.1        9.6        8.8      165.57      139.7 June                21.3        8.3        6.3      165.32      141.7 July                20.5        8.1        6.9      172.22      139.2 August              19.9        7.4        5.9      177.11      137.0 September           21.1        8.2        7.2      169.05      142.5 October             21.3        8.9        7.7      159.93      148.2 November            22.1        9.1        9.3      153.22      150.3 December            21.7        8.8        7.8      153.57      150.7 January 1993        23.3        8.9        7.4      149.62      151.3 February            24.0       10.4        9.3      142.00      159.2 March               25.5       10.6       13.8      138.61      164.4 April                                               137.17      167.8  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                   GERMANY  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               Visible    Current     Ecu      Effective                                trade     account   exchange    exchange                    Exports    balance    balance     rate         rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985                242.8      33.4       21.7      2.2260      100.0 1986                248.6      53.4       40.3      2.1279      108.8 1987                254.3      56.8       39.8      2.0710      115.3 1988                272.6      61.6       42.9      2.0739      114.6 1989                310.2      65.3       52.3      2.0681      113.5 1990                323.9      51.8       37.2      2.0537      119.1 1991                327.4      11.2      -16.2      2.0480      117.7 1992                330.3      16.4      -19.9      2.0187      121.2 2nd qtr. 1992         81.1       3.6       -5.2      2.0511      118.7 3rd qtr. 1992         83.9       6.4       -6.4      2.0221      122.1 4th qtr. 1992         82.1       3.4       -4.1      1.9593      125.0 1st qtr. 1993                                        1.9348      125.6 May 1992             26.5       0.6       -2.1      2.0551      118.4 June                 25.1       0.6       -2.1      2.0498      119.1 July                 28.3       1.0       -3.8      2.0410      120.7 August               27.7       3.1       -0.7      2.0326      122.0 September            27.8       2.3       -1.8      1.9927      123.6 October              28.6       2.4       -1.3      1.9564      125.7 November             26.8       0.9       -0.3      1.9634      124.0 December             26.7       0.0       -2.5      1.9581      125.3 January 1993         25.8                 -2.7      1.9327      125.3 February                                  -2.7      1.9318      125.8 March                                               1.9399      125.7 April                                               1.9483      125.5  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                   FRANCE  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               Visible    Current     Ecu      Effective                                trade     account   exchange    exchange                     Exports   balance    balance     rate        rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985                 133.4     -3.6       -0.2      6.7942       100.0 1986                 127.1      0.0        3.0      6.7946       102.8 1987                 128.3     -4.6       -3.6      6.9265       103.0 1988                 141.9     -3.9       -3.4      7.0354       100.8 1989                 162.9     -6.3       -3.6      7.0169        99.8 1990                 170.1     -7.2       -7.2      6.9202       104.8 1991                 175.4     -4.2       -4.7      6.9643       102.7 1992                 182.4      4.3        2.1      6.8420       106.0 2nd qtr. 1992          46.2      1.5        0.9      6.9122       104.4 3rd qtr. 1992          45.2      0.9        0.0      6.8536       106.6 4th qtr. 1992          45.5      1.0        2.3      6.6529       109.3 1st qtr. 1993                                        6.5633       110.0 May 1992              15.0     0.59       1.38      6.9090       104.5 June                  15.4    -0.16      -0.54      6.9001       104.9 July                  15.5     0.87      -0.16      6.8872       106.0 August                14.2    -0.45       0.25      6.8944       106.3 September             15.6     0.49      -0.04      6.7792       107.6 October               15.1     0.11       0.99      6.6368       110.0 November              15.1     0.05       0.13      6.6426       109.0 December              15.3     0.85       1.14      6.6793       108.9 January 1993          13.7     0.48       0.69      6.5539       109.7 February                                            6.5442       110.3 March                                               6.5919       109.9 April                                               6.5875       110.5  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                                 ITALY  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               Visible    Current      Ecu     Effective                                trade     account   exchange    exchange                    Exports    balance    balance     rate       rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985                103.7     -16.0       -5.4      1443.0      100.0 1986                 99.4      -2.5       -1.4      1461.6      101.4 1987                100.7      -7.5       -2.1      1494.3      101.2 1988                108.3      -8.9       -8.0      1536.8       97.8 1989                127.8     -11.3      -17.0      1509.2       98.6 1990                133.6      -9.3      -18.0      1523.2      100.6 1991                137.0     -10.5      -28.9      1531.3       98.9 1992                137.9      -8.0      -11.0      1591.5       95.7 2nd qtr. 1992         35.8      -3.6       -2.9      1546.3       98.5 3rd qtr. 1992         32.9       0.5       -5.5      1564.6       98.2 4th qtr. 1992         34.9       0.0        0.0      1719.4       87.1 1st qtr. 1993                              -4.9      1827.9       80.5 May 1992             11.5      -1.9       -0.9      1546.6       98.5 June                 12.7      -0.5       -1.0      1550.3       98.5 July                 13.9       0.8       -1.9      1546.2       99.5 August                7.7       1.1       -1.5      1543.4      100.1 September            11.3      -1.4       -2.0      1604.1       95.0 October              12.4       0.1        1.5      1723.8       87.3 November             10.8      -1.2       -0.9      1687.0       88.7 December             11.6       1.1       -0.6      1747.5       85.6 January 1993          9.7       0.4       -3.1      1784.9       82.5 February              0.6                           1822.3       80.8 March                -2.4                           1876.4       78.5 April                                               1871.4       79.0  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               UNITED KINGDOM  -----------------------------------------------------------------------                               Visible    Current     Ecu      Effective                                trade     account   exchange    exchange                     Exports   balance    balance     rate        rate  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1985                 132.4     -5.7        4.7      0.5890      100.0 1986                 108.3    -14.2        0.1      0.6708       91.6 1987                 112.3    -16.4       -6.4      0.7047       90.1 1988                 120.9    -32.3      -24.3      0.6643       95.5 1989                 137.0    -36.7      -32.3      0.6728       92.6 1990                 142.3    -26.3      -23.8      0.7150       91.3 1991                 147.7    -14.7       -9.0      0.7002       91.7 1992                 145.1    -18.7      -16.1      0.7359       88.4 2nd qtr. 1992          38.0     -4.5       -4.4      0.7034       92.3 3rd qtr. 1992          36.4     -4.5       -3.0      0.7261       90.9 4th qtr. 1992          34.3     -5.4       -4.6      0.8015       79.8 1st qtr. 1993                                        0.8017       78.5 May 1992              13.0     -1.2      -1.17      0.7000       92.8 June                  12.5     -1.3      -1.30      0.7027       92.9 July                  12.3     -1.6      -1.06      0.7137       92.5 August                12.3     -1.6      -1.09      0.7219       92.0 September             11.8     -1.3      -0.85      0.7428       88.2 October               11.5     -1.4      -1.19      0.7969       80.8 November              11.4     -1.7      -1.50      0.8100       78.3 December              11.5     -2.2      -1.93      0.7976       80.0 January 1993                                        0.7809       80.6 February                                            0.8179       76.8 March                                               0.8061       78.2 April                                               0.7894       80.5  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- All trade figures are seasonally adjusted, except for the Italian series and the German current account. Imports can be derived by subtracting the visible trade balance from exports. Export and import data are calculated on the FOB (free on board) basis, except for German and Italian imports which use the CIF method (including carriage, insurance and freight charges). German data up to and including June 1990, shown in italics, refer to the former West Germany. The nominal effective exchange rates are period averages of Bank of England trade-weighted indices. Data supplied by Datastream and WEFA from national government and central bank sources.  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
19930811000000000	FT  11 AUG 93 / Business and the Environment: Linking cash with conservation  -A wildlife scheme in Zimbabwe which is encouraging rural economic development. When the elephant was voted the world's most popular animal, you can bet the people of Hurungwe district in northern Zimbabwe were not consulted. Every year, they live in fear of elephants trampling through fields of maize that took months to prepare and tend. One night's feast for an elephant can wipe out an entire year's harvest. Homes might be wrecked if situated in the animals' paths. Children and adults are injured and sometimes killed. Why, then, are villagers thinking of constructing water dams and putting down salt to encourage elephants into their area? Why are they discouraging illegal settlers so that their land might be used instead by elephants? The answer lies in a novel programme which is giving economic value to elephants and other wildlife on Zimbabwe's communal lands. Under Campfire (Communal Areas Management Programme for Indigenous Resources), rural communities are managing to make money from animals which until recently were poached as pests. The programme is simultaneously encouraging economic development and a conservation ethos in rural areas. Campfire works by linking cash with conservation. Until recently, rural communities were not allowed to make any use of wildlife on their lands  - poaching was common, either for food or to stop animals destroying crops and endangering people. Now, districts accepted into the programme are allowed to shoot a certain number of animals every year, for sale either as meat or safari trophies. The programme - run by the government and conservation organisations - gives rural communities a choice. They can shoot an animal that is damaging crops and sell its meat, earning, for example, about Pounds 1,600 for an elephant; or they can save the quota for safari hunting, where an elephant will earn the community Pounds 4,000-Pounds 6,000. A typical annual wildlife quota per district might include a variety of wildlife, such as seven elephants, 20 buffalo and 20 baboons. Campfire is creating an additional source of income for subsistence farmers. Last year, eight districts earned about Pounds 350,000 from safari hunting - mostly from Americans keen to collect an elephant trophy. Participating communities decide whether to invest the money in community projects - such as schools, dams or grinding mills - or divide it among households for personal use. In one ward, households earned Pounds 60 each from Campfire last year - a welcome addition to the average annual income of about Pounds 80. The programme is also encouraging the spread of business skills. Local Campfire committees are going into partnership with well-established safari operators to market their quotas; community investments are creating small-scale industries such as the grinding mills and bee-keeping; other tourist ventures are under way, such as hiking and photographic safaris. Cash and conservation are an attractive couple, says Lovemore Katena, a ward councillor in Hurungwe district. 'The best thing about Campfire is that we are learning to manage our resources and we benefit from them.' The conservation benefits are becoming clear. Villagers involved are actively discouraging wildlife poaching, confiscating snares, reporting poaching incidents and guarding against bush fires which are used to flush out animals but also destroy vegetation. They discourage illegal settlement and illegal gold panning, which contribute to the destruction of the land, rivers and vegetation. Only firm evidence of the link between conservation and economic development can maintain people's commitment to Campfire, says Cherry Bird, wildlife co-ordinator for Hurungwe district. 'Everybody has to feel they are benefiting tangibly from this programme so they'll be involved in management decisions. It sounds idealistic, but the alternative is to have no wildlife.' The nomadic nature of wildlife is proving a problem. The community where an animal is shot is the community that earns money - although several areas may have suffered crop damage en route. There is, therefore, no guarantee of a stable income from year to year. Some villagers argue they are being bribed to put up with wildlife. Others want their quotas increased so they can shoot more animals and earn more. Nevertheless, districts are queueing up to be accepted into Campfire. By the end of the year, 24 will have Campfire status and by 2000 more than half the country is expected to be devoted to wildlife conservation under the programme. Elephants - which are not an endangered species in Zimbabwe - remain the biggest earners under Campfire because of their status symbol to safari hunters. The hope is that other community businesses will become equally important to the local economies over time, says Ivan Bond, Campfire research fellow at the World Wide Fund for Nature. 'In the long-term, Campfire principles will have to be applied holistically to the whole range of natural resources. If the institutions exist for the management of one common property resource, it should not be too difficult to extend these to other resources.'
19930821000000000	FT  21 AUG 93 / Despatches: Poachers close in on the tiger - India is home to two-thirds of the world's tigers. From 1973 to 1989 numbers doubled. But the poachers have returned and extinction again looms. PROTECTING the tigers of Ranthambhore, India's best-known wildlife reserve, almost cost Devi Singh Rathore his life. The 24-year-old forest guard was shot in the head, face and shoulder by a suspected poacher who fired at his Jeep with a shotgun. The guard sitting next to him took the full force of the blast and died instantly. A third man in the back of the vehicle was also killed and a fourth was injured. 'What happened was terrible,' says Rathore, wincing from the pain of the two pellets which are still lodged in his body. 'If this carries on it will be impossible to save the tigers.' The guards were attacked last April after being called out to track suspected poachers on the edge of the Ranthambhore reserve in the hot sandstone hills of southern Rajastan. After three days travelling from village to village in search of information, they stumbled across three men camping in a makeshift tent. They arrested two, but the third escaped. On the way to back to their HQ, the guards stopped for a meal and a rest. The delay proved fatal. The escaped poacher had got ahead of the guards and, knowing the road they would have to take, had laid an ambush. Choosing a steep-sided gorge, he rolled rocks into the road and hid behind the trees. When the Jeep arrived, the poacher opened fire with a crude muzzle-loading shotgun. Police later arrested a man and charged him with murder. Poachers have long been active in India's reserves, hunting tigers, leopards and other cats for their fur and small animals for meat. Most have been villagers living near parks with few other means of support. In the 1970s and 1980s, India had great success in protecting tigers through a national campaign called Project Tiger, launched in 1973. From one year to the next the numbers of Indian tigers went up. From about 2,000 in 1973, India's tiger population rose to 4,300 by 1989, out of an estimated world total of 6,000-7,000. Over the same period, India's human population rose by 60 per cent and the economy doubled in size. India's experience seemed to prove that even in a poor and over-populated country, protection of the environment and economic development were not incompatible. Ranthambhore, the beautiful former hunting preserve of the maharajahs of Jaipur, achieved particular fame because its tigers forsook traditional habits and became active during the day - supposedly because they now felt safe from man. The park, with its ancient forts, Moghul pavilions and lakes, attracted plenty of tourists. It was not until last year that conservationists realised that something was seriously wrong - when reports indicated alarming declines in the numbers of tigers at India's leading national parks. At Ranthambhore, the tiger tally dropped from 45 in 1991 to 17 last year, though the figure was revised this year to 28. For wildlife experts the conclusion seemed inescapable: tigers were disappearing so fast that their survival was at stake. Experts were quick to identify the origin of the new threat - an upsurge in demand for tiger bone for Chinese medicine. Chinese apothecaries believe tiger bone has the power to restore energy and sexual prowess. Factories in China, Taiwan and South Korea produce tens of thousands of bottles of tiger bone medicine for sale in east Asia and in Chinese communities around the world. Conservationists say these factories have in the past used bone from Chinese tigers, including a vast stock which was accumulated when over 1,000 tigers were hunted and killed as pests in the 1950s in southern China. In the last few years this stock seems to have run low, just at a time when fast economic growth has created millions of new customers for tiger bone medicine. The trade is quite open. Until recently apothecaries in Tihwa Street in Taipei displayed tiger bones in their windows, selling at a retail price of up to Dollars 1,500 per kilogramme. The Huangshi Long March pharmaceutical factory in Hubei province, northern China, puts a tiger emblem on its packets of musk and tiger-bone plasters for use in treating rheumatism. The first evidence of tigers being killed for their bones in India came in 1987 when poachers operating in the foothills of the Himalaya, in Uttar Pradesh, were found to have discarded a skin. Proof came last year at Ranthambhore when a local poacher named Gopal Mogya and an accomplice, a meat trader, were caught on the edge of the park carrying a gun and a bag of bones. The police say that Mogya confessed to selling bones and skins to a butcher in the nearby town of Sawai Madhopur. In turn, the butcher said he supplied Mohamed Ashiq and Mohamed Ahmed, two brothers who own a tanning business in Fatehpur, a centre of the leather industry, some 200 miles from Sawai Madhopur. Mohan Singh Bhati, the police superintendent at Sawai Madhopur, who estimates that 14-18 tigers have been poached from Ranthambhore, says it is the first time Indian police have broken such an extensive poaching ring. From Fatehpur, the trail led to New Delhi where the police are investigating several fur and skin traders but have made no further arrests. Wildlife experts working for Traffic, a unit of the World Wide Fund for Nature, which monitors trade in endangered species, say that Delhi is an important centre for dealing in skins, bones and other products. The principal traders are often Kashmiris, who have moved their businesses to Delhi. Kashmiris have a tradition of fur-making; they also have long-standing experience of trading with foreigners. They established world-wide networks in the fur trade before international agreements in the 1970s suppressed the legitimate trade in wild animal products. A few fur shops trade openly in New Delhi, for example in Yashwant Place, a run-down shopping centre favoured by hawkers dealing in smuggled wrist watches and Russian champagne. But Traffic's experts believe that most of the skins are smuggled out of India, mainly to Kathmandu in Nepal, where there is also a sizeable Kashmiri community. Nepal, like India, has tough laws against trading wild animal skins, but they are barely enforced. Tourists can easily buy coats made of leopard and other skins in shops near big hotels. Traffic researchers who visited the area last year counted 294 coats made from the skins of over 100 leopards, 14 clouded leopards and 2,500 other wild cats. Traffic says tiger skins and bones are smuggled out of India by the same route but are rarely seen because of the international publicity that tigers attract. The bones are mostly ground into powder and carried by couriers overland into Tibet or by air to Bangkok and Hong Kong. Vivek Menon, of Traffic's Delhi office, says it is futile trying to estimate how much bone is taken out of India. 'Very few people are arrested. And they are always the minions.' The conservationists' top priority is to try to stop the bone-related poaching. India, Nepal and China are all signatories of the 1973 Convention on Trade in Endangered Species, the main international agreement restricting trade in wildlife. In line with the convention, all these countries have passed tough laws against trade in the products of endangered species. But enforcement varies greatly. Even in India, which has a comparatively good record, there is a loophole that allows traders in Kashmir to deal in skins taken from pre-1979 stocks. Under pressure from conservationists, governments are starting to act. China has announced plans for an east Asian wildlife protocol, an agreement to restrict trade in wildlife, to be signed later this year by ministers from east Asian countries. But it is difficult to see what benefits the protocol will bring, other than to remind governments of their existing commitments. Kamal Nath, the Indian minister for the environment and forests, says protecting the tiger is an issue for all countries. 'We need help,' he says. The help he has in mind is pressure on east Asian countries brought by the US and other export markets. Conservationists also believe that important changes are needed in the running of the 19 reserves which now come under Project Tiger. These reserves are the pick of India's wildlife parks, sanctuaries not only for tigers but for numerous other species, including leopards, elephants and the country's last surviving rhinoceroses. The decline in the numbers of tigers has drawn attention to serious shortcomings in the management of these parks. Valmik Thapar, author of studies on the tigers of Ranthambhore, says the only way forward is to involve local people more in the running of the park. Former poachers would make good gamekeepers. Villagers could be encouraged to work as forest guards. Informants could be paid for tips about poachers. Without such efforts, the tiger may be doomed. Christian Tyler (Private View) and James Morgan (As They Say In Europe) are on holiday.
19930901000000000	FT  01 SEP 93 / Survey of Africa - A continent at stake (14): An issue the west ignores at its peril - Environment / The problems of over-population, over-cultivation and over-grazing. NO ISSUE divides Africa from the first world more strongly than the environment. While the west worries about the endangered black rhino and loss of bio-diversity, most Africans are too exhausted from the daily struggle to find fuel and water to care about the destruction of their environment. The priorities of each seem irreconcilable, and yet, they need not be. What is needed is a greater awareness in the industrialised world of how its policies exacerbate Africa's environmental crisis. And African governments need to place greater emphasis on combatting the extreme poverty which is a cause, as well as a result, of environmental degradation. There is little time to reverse the damage. At current growth rates, Sub-Saharan Africa's population of 600m will double in 22 years. The World Bank estimates the growth rate will decline from the present 3.1 per cent to 2.5 per cent at the end of the decade, as Aids takes its toll and family planning becomes more widespread. However, even this decline will not be enough to prevent the population doubling early in the next century. Already, women in the Sahel and many parts of east Africa walk 15km each day to gather a bundle of firewood. In a few years, there will be more mouths to feed and less wood to burn. Over-cultivation and over-grazing are transforming much of the continent into a vast wasteland: an area twice the size of India, according to the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), is under direct threat of desertification. In addition, Africa is losing 2.7m hectares of woodlands every year. In most countries, forests are disappearing because people need land for farming, not wood to burn. When famine sweeps across Africa, the west calls it a natural disaster and spends billions of dollars in emergency food relief. But Africa's hunger is not simply a question of crop failure. In 1985, five out of six nations on a United Nations list of famine-afflicted countries were also racked by civil war. In Ethiopia, Chad, Sudan, Mozambique and Angola, it was difficult to distinguish between drought-related famine and war-induced starvation. 'For the past 20 years, civil strife has indirectly wreaked as much devastation on the environment as any other cause in Africa,' argues Dr Roger Batty, an Oxford historian and consultant at UNEP. He believes western powers have been culpable of fuelling conflict by arming their client states on the continent. With the end of the cold war, however, superpower interest in conducting wars-by-proxy on the continent has evaporated, and it is hoped that the level of military aid to African governments will also fall. Environmental degradation can also add to the pressures from which conflict emerges. 'The next war in our region will be over the waters of the Nile, not politics,' Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, now the UN secretary-general, warned in 1985. The Nile basin touches on nine other countries, reaching as far south as Tanzania and Zaire. All upstream nations are keen to extend land under irrigation by tapping Egypt's only source of water. 'Without political imagination,' Mr Boutros Ghali continued, 'Egypt will become a new Bangladesh fraught with drought and famine - but with one difference. This Bangladesh will be on the shores of the Mediterranean, half-an-hour by jet from the rich people in the north.' Already, according to the UN High Commission for Refugees, there are 5m displaced people on the continent. To call them refugees would be a misnomer, for most will never be able to return to their homes. Many are fleeing land too degraded to support them. Others seek refuge from civil war, government repression, ethnic conflict, or simply the desperate poverty of rural areas. But up to now, the west has preferred to focus on endangered animals, rather than endangered humans. The expulsion of Maasai pastoralists from 4,800 square miles of traditional grazing land which became the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania was one of the first important battles fought by western conservationists in Africa. All over the continent, 'experts' imposed the theory that wildlife and people should be separated. This principle is now being challenged. 'It is hard to imagine that 150,000 tourists are not causing greater environmental damage and disturbing wildlife far more than 2,000 Maasai ever did,' says Mr Raymond Bonner, a US journalist and author of At the Hand of Man: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife. New solutions are required which marry the needs of local people to those of the environment. In Luwangwa, Zambia, hunting rights are auctioned among safari companies and the revenues are channelled to the local tribes. As a result, villagers have started supporting the national parks service and set up security committees to prevent poachers entering into their areas. The number of poached carcasses of elephants and black rhinos in Luwangwa fell by 90 per cent between 1985 and 1987. The lesson to be learned is that Africa needs an economic incentive to protect its wildlife. But western institutions - be they tourist or pharmaceutical companies - are often reluctant to pay the price. Far more worrying than the endangered black rhino are Africa's disappearing insects and plants - species that could hold the cure for Aids. Already, Africa has destroyed 65 per cent of its original wildlife habitats. Concerns about the staggering loss of bio-diversity are not exaggerated. A substance discovered in the rosy periwinkle, a species unique to Madagascar, has quadrupled the survival rate for children suffering from leukemia. Worldwide sales of the rosy periwinkle drug now earn more than Dollars 100m a year, but not a cent has accrued to Madagascar in compensation for preserving the plant's habitat. A growing number of ecologists now argue that the best way of persuading African nations to protect their bio-diversity is by paying them to leave their natural resources intact. What is found in Africa may be needed in Europe and the rest of the developed world. Paper mills in the US and Japan, for example, are experimenting with an African plant, Kenaf, a relative of jute, which produces five times more pulp than the average tree. After 30 years of investigations, the US Department of Agriculture has singled out Kenaf as the most promising substitute to produce tree-free paper. It is an annual crop, whereas man-made forests require up to 60 years in the northern hemisphere to reach maturity. US newspapers which have tested Kenaf newsprint report that it is brighter, reproduces better pictures, and uses less ink, which does not stain hands. Africa's environmental problems are often portrayed in doomsday tones. In reality, they are neither insoluble nor insurmountable. What is needed is a radical reassessment of the value the industrialised world places on Africa's environmental health. It is an issue the west ignores at its peril.
19930918000000000	FT  18 SEP 93 / How we saved the rhino with rifle and chainsaw: Elizabeth Robinson watches a desperate attempt to beat the poachers. THE CONVOY giving chase through the African bush was an assortment of pick-ups, a Land Rover and trucks all being directed by a crackled message from a scout helicopter, call sign Z-HOT. Trackers had scoured the earth for clues and reported to the helicopter. When the animal came within 30m of the chopper - the range of the full-bore air pressure rifle on board - it was shot. In many cases, mothers and their young were felled within metres of each other; sometimes the baby panicked, ran off and collapsed as far as a mile from where its mother lay. Rhino hunting in Zimbabwe has found new impetus. But take heart - these are hunts to save the lives of a vanishing species, performed by vets using sleep-inducing darts, not the AKs of the poachers. Poaching has wiped out all but - at an optimistic estimate - 500 of Zimbabwe's rhinos; four years ago there were more than 2,000. The hunter's aim in both cases is the same: to remove the rhino's horn. A successful poacher will get less than Pounds 100 for the horn, which is then sold for as much as Dollars 20,000 (Pounds 13,000) in the Far East where it is thought to enhance sexual potency, or to Yemen to be made into highly prized dagger handles. A successful vet will hope that the dehorned rhino has been given a stay of execution. Zimbabwe has been dehorning its rhino population for a year, following the example of Namibia. Mark Atkinson, a vet for Zimbabwe's National Parks working almost exclusively on the dehorning programme, believes about 60 per cent of Zimbabwe's rhino population has been dehorned. He stresses that the programme is not a long-term solution to save the rhino, but prefers to call it 'crisis management'. In other words, the vets are trying to give the rhinos a respite from poachers so that the species can build its numbers up to a comfortable level. By dehorning the few left, the species may survive. It costs between Dollars 500 and Dollars 1,000 to dehorn one rhino. It can also take several days to track one animal, and a dozen or more burly men to heave the captured rhino into a crate for transportation to a safer area. With no dedicated rhino unit in Zimbabwe, the conservationists are desperate for any help they can get. The British Army's Mozambique Training Team, based in the east of the country, has been lending radios, trucks and muscle to Zimbabwe's effort. They helped to move seven rhinos at Lake Kyle which had been stranded when the rains came, and took part in a three-week operation to dehorn about 60 animals in the Bushey Park area. Under Lt Col Robert Martin, officers and senior NCOs from BMATT (British Military Advisory and Training Team) joined the veterinarian team and trackers at a private game lodge about three hours south of Harare. The vets particularly wanted help in dehorning and moving the white rhinos, which are more susceptible to stress than black ones. Once the trackers and vets have sighted and shot a rhino, the convoy of trucks with its winches and crates rushed to where the animal lay. A hood was placed over the rhino's head to shield its eyes and ears. The removal of the horn takes only a few minutes. Chainsaws cut through it as easily as through a small tree; the vet takes longer to shape the stump so that it will not become ingrown. Rhino horns regrow at an average of 8cm a year. Small slivers of horn are barely distinguishable from a human fingernail. Part of the exercise was to move the rhinos to a safer area - private gameparks or farms. A truck winched down a crate to lie with its open door facing the rhino and a rope was tied around the animal's huge snout. About eight soldiers took up positions around the animal to push it into the crate, while as many again were at the back of the crate ready to heave on the rope and pull the rhino in. Rather than shift two to three tons of deadweight, the animal was revived with a sleeping drug antidote and water was poured into its ear to wake it. As soon as it started moving, the heaving and pushing began until the door of the crate was closed on a very irate and confused beast. The crate was then winched on to the truck and the rhinos driven to a secret location where they are released into a corral and monitored before being taken to a safe area. There are so few rhinos left that the vets keep detailed identification details of each one they catch. As well as nicks cut out of their ears, age, condition and distinguishing marks being noted, 'mug shots' are taken. Seven rhinos were dehorned that weekend - one calf, at four to six months old, had no horn to speak of. Euan Anderson, a Zimbabwean vet, believes that since the dehorning programme started in Zimbabwe, four to five dehorned rhinos have been killed by poachers. This may be because when poachers have spent several days following rhino spoor they may kill the animal to cut off its ears as proof to their paymasters, or it may simply be that the poachers were not aware until after the shooting that the rhino they had been following was carrying nothing of value. To combat the latter, Zimbabwe has been advertising its dehorning programme on Zambian television - it is believed that the poachers come from Zambia, though some have hinted that the worst culprits are much closer to the Zimbabwe parks. Studies are in progress in Namibia and Zimbabwe to determine the long-term effect on the rhino's behaviour of having its horn removed. Euan Anderson believes that the rhino is not greatly affected. Even in self defence, as he says, if a three-ton beast charges towards impact at full speed, it does not much matter whether it has a horn or not. More than one of the officers involved in the rescue observed that 'Civvies would pay a fortune to do this'. Indeed, I felt privileged to be there to see the magnificent animals sleeping, touch their skin that feels like slightly spongy granite and stroke their ears, which on black rhinos are fringed with long silky black hairs. Zimbabwe had, in fact, investigated the possibility of selling 'rhino hunting', particularly to the US. The idea was that for around Dollars 30,000 a hunter would be given the facilities to track and dart a rhino, leaving the vets to do the rest, and take home the horn as a souvenir. However, the proposal met with outcry and resistance in the US. Another idea that the vets approve of is to flood the market with the huge stockpile of legally-removed rhino horn, force down the market price and thus make poaching unviable. They stipulate, however, that the revenues should be ploughed back into rhino conservation. Bushmen and vets in Zimbabwe are passionate in their commitment in saving the rhino from extinction. While Mark Atkinson was busy with the chainsaw, a vet from the US whispered: 'Your gardeners in England earn more than he does.' Earlier, on a walking safari deep in the bush of Hwange National Park, I was nervously quizzing my armed guide about the procedure should an animal charge (do not shoot until it is 10 feet away and approaching). And what if your party of tourists should be charged by a rhino? I asked. He shrugged.
19931023000000000	FT  23 OCT 93 / Travel: Kenya - just beating around the bush - Afraid of being eaten, Michael Thompson-Noel still got close to elephants and seven cheetah. DAY 1, 2pm: Happiness is seeping into me, like a welcome dose of painkiller. I am at Rekero Farm, under the crest of Kipeleo hill, in the north-western part of Kenya's Masai Mara conservation area, watching elephants drinking at a water-hole which is fed by a year-round spring. The elephants snort and push, and spray themselves with dust. I arrived from London yesterday and was transferred at once to Nairobi's smaller airport where I caught a charter flight to an airstrip in the Mara. Total travelling time from Heathrow: 12 1/2 hours. Impact on the psyche: immediate and considerable. My regret at transiting Nairobi: absolutely zero. Richard Leakey, director of the Kenya Wildlife Service, admits that the back streets of Nairobi, where lynchings are commonplace, some by necklacing, are now no safer than the back streets of Miami, and that the city's vice and violence have played a role in the decline in Kenyan tourism. Ron Beaton, who runs Rekero Farm with Pauline, his wife, says: 'Staying overnight in Nairobi is a complete waste of time. It used to be a fun city; now it's a den of iniquity.' So to hell with Nairobi. By now the wind has shifted slightly. The elephants have smelt me. Irritably they wave their trunks. They glare across the water-hole. Crossly, they move away. The peace at Rekero - a private home with accommodation for six guests  - is as fine as its old-time hospitality. Guests sleep in twin thatched cottages which overlook the water-hole, 30 yards away. There is wildlife all around, including, says Ron Beaton, three prides of lion. Beaton is a third-generation Kenyan with a farming and wildlife background. 'If clients are hyper on seeing the Big Five (lion, leopard, Cape buffalo, black rhino and elephant),' he cautions, 'then they'd be better off in the game lodges. Here, we put more emphasis on an authentic African experience than on cut-glass luxury.' Yet Rekero is perfectly civilised. This morning Ron led our little group on a game-drive and walk. I much preferred the drive. Game-walks make my heart race. You can trudge along for hours, scarcely seeing a thing. You could easily be eaten. I imagine it happens often: a roar and a thud and - arrghhh] What surprised me this morning was that we saw seven cheetah from a range of a few feet. They virtually ignored the vehicle. First we saw two males, walking slowly across the plain, their cheeks bloodied from breakfast. Then a female with a cub (the only survivor of three). And then a female with two cubs, barely four weeks old, vulnerable and mewling. When they skittered away, the female called to them anxiously. Day 2, 6pm: I am sitting alone on Rekero's veranda. The others have gone for a walk, heedless of gathering lion and of other unspeakable dangers. I am flipping through the pages of African Hunter, a dinosaur of a tome even when it was published in 1975. It is a reverential guide to the business of slaughtering wildlife by a man, James Mellon, who had shot approximately 450 African game animals. In Chapter II, in a section about Tanzania, Mellon discusses methodology: 'Leopard occur virtually everywhere in Tanzania and can be attracted to dead bait without much difficulty. Many huge old toms have been taken in the north along the korongos (dry watercourses) of Masailand, but with luck a trophy cat can be shot almost anywhere. Where circumstances permit, leopard can sometimes be drawn out of thick cover by beaters and shot on the run with 00 buckshot. But baiting in trees with putrid carcases is usually more successful.' Today, Richard Leakey says that Kenya's conservation efforts are producing good results. Nearly 28,000 square miles are protected areas. In the past two years Kenya has attracted more than Dollars 150m (Pounds 99.3m) in outside aid to spend on wildlife conservation and the necessary infrastructure. 'It is often claimed,' he says, 'that in Kenya more and more tourists are clustering round fewer and fewer animals. Yet of 52 national parks and reserves, only seven are accessible to mass tourism. 'Our security is excellent. We have 900 armed men, plus good surveillance and intelligence. In general, the standard of safety for tourists in our parks is good, and commercial poaching has been reduced virtually to zero. 'One of the biggest problems now is destruction of crops by elephants. We are losing 50-60 elephants a year - no more than 10 in the national parks - as a result of attacks by villagers, compared with the thousands being lost previously. 'Kenya is firmly opposed to any renewal of trade in ivory and rhino horn for at least five years. If trade in ivory were to restart in any part of Africa, the black market would start again and we would face renewed serious security problems in our national parks. 'Numbers? Kenya's black rhino population is certainly now 400-450, compared with 300-350 four years ago. There are 80 white rhino, which are not indigenous, mostly on private land, and about 26,000 elephants, compared with a low of possibly 18,000.' Day 3, 4pm: Now I am at Ol Donyo Wuas - it means spotted hills in Masai - more than 200 miles south-east of the Mara, in the foothills of the Chyulu hills which run between Amboseli and Tsavo national parks. This is supremely beautiful country: semi-arid, with a short-grass plain stretching to the horizon on which, 45 miles away, Mt Kilimanjaro is propped. Annual rainfall hereabouts: 20 inches annually. The nearest source of water: a village 23 miles away. Ol Donyo Wuas is owned and run by Richard Bonham, a buccaneering bachelor - he is a qualified commercial pilot - who specialises in unusual safaris, including walking-and-boating adventures from his camp on the Rufiji river in Selous game reserve, southern Tanzania. Accommodation at Ol Donyo Wuas is in four comfortable cottages, limiting guests to a maximum of eight. Activities available include game drives and walks, horse riding, horse safaris (you stay in camps each night) and bird shooting (July to October). Because of the dryness there is less game here than in the Mara, but there is still quite enough. Unsurprisingly, Bonham rates the location of his home one of the most startling in Kenya. He discovered it from the air. Like Ron Beaton in the Mara, Bonham works closely with the local Masai, who view him as a friend and from whom he rents his land. I asked Bonham what he did to help the Masai, beyond his role as an employer. He said: 'I represent them on a wildlife committee; run a cropping programme; have set up a women's workshop, which I use as a forum for wildlife education; have established a trust which pays for wildlife scholarships and for schoolbooks. And if someone gets mauled by animals, I try to cover the cost.' A year ago he was asked to rescue a 17-year-old Masai who had been badly mauled on a lion hunt. The lion had killed a cow, so a dozen warriors hunted it. Three speared it; then the 17-year-old was mauled. Bonham rescued him and flew him to the best hospital in Nairobi which patched him up. Medical bills alone ran to Dollars 1,500. The warrior recovered; now he is a herder. A Masai lion-hunt must be a sight-and-a-half. The warriors run the beast down - stamina is not its forte - and are armed only with spears. The most courageous warrior is the one who grabs the lion's tail and holds on to it. Usually the warriors are juiced-up on a decoction of the bark of acacia nilotica, which acts as a powerful stimulant. It is a fine plant, the acacia. Other members of the subfamily are used by medicine men for treating diarrhoea, intestinal worms, itchy rash, female sterility, snake bite, malaria, bubonic plague, bleeding, skin eruptions, brain infections, swellings, and head or body sores. Day 4, 5pm: For a final dose of painkiller I have travelled, via Nairobi, to the comfortable tented camp on Funzi Island, 40 miles south of Mombasa, where the pleasant mindless life of small tropical islands anywhere is abundantly in evidence: fishing, goggling, swimming, or idling through the mangroves. In an hour's time I start my return trek to London. It gets harder every time. Michael Thompson-Noel's trip was organised by Worldwide Journeys and Expeditions. The company's new brochure is published next week: 8 Comeragh Road, London W14 9HP, tel: 071-381 8638, fax: 071-381 0836. There is a 15-day 'Homes of Kenya' holiday in the new brochure which takes in Ol Donyo Wuas, Rekero Farm and Funzi Island, plus Sangare Ranch in the foothills of the Aberdares. Based on four people travelling together, the price is Pounds 2,795 per person (Jan-Nov) or Pounds 2,930 (Dec). However, Worldwide Journeys and Expeditions will put together almost any itinerary you want, for Kenya or elsewhere. Details of other visits to Kenyan homesteads can be had from Ron Beaton: Off the Beaton Track, PO Box 14398, Nairobi, tel: 506139/502491. Richard Bonham can be contacted via PO Box 24133, Nairobi, tel: 882521. For Funzi Island: PO Box 90246, Mombasa, tel: 228677.
19940307000000000	FT  07 MAR 94 / African task force to combat wildlife traffickers. Law enforcement officers from nine African countries are meeting in Nairobi this week to create a regional task force to fight international crime syndicates dealing in ivory, rhino horn, diamonds, arms and drugs. 'We need a highly mobile team of officers with the authority to operate across borders to penetrate. . . increasingly sophisticated smuggling networks,' says Lt Col Pieter Lategan of the South African police force's Endangered Species Protection Unit. 'With an African task force, we could place wildlife traffickers under surveillance as they move across borders, so that entire networks, and not just individuals, could be apprehended,' he said. Trafficking in wildlife is on the rise, and has become linked to illegal trade in weapons and drugs across southern and eastern Africa. Mr Lategan's unit impounded 2,200 tusks last year - hacked into 22,000 cubes to facilitate smuggling - compared with 130 tusks in 1992. Kenya seized more than 1,000 kg of ivory in 1993 in a case involving five Koreans and one Ethiopian smuggler. Officials from Kenya's Wildlife Service, who have won plaudits worldwide for their anti-poaching efforts, say they need freedom to cross borders when pursuing poachers and smugglers. They would also welcome extradition treaties to trap ring leaders of international networks. Zambia arrested 1,500 poachers in 1993 and seized more than 2,000 automatic weapons. Uganda is concerned with the growing trade in chimpanzees and rare birds. Swaziland says it has lost 60 per cent of its white rhino population since poachers invaded the landlocked kingdom in 1988. 'Hardened criminals are what we are often up against,' says a Swazi police officer. 'They deal not only in poaching, but in gun-running, drugs, grand larceny and murder.' Mozambique, which is emerging from a 17-year civil war, has become a free-for-all for poaching gangs, including foreign armed forces who regularly invade Mozambique from neighbouring countries. According to the law enforcement officers at the Nairobi conference, it is known that Zambians and Malawians hunt elephants in Tete province, while Tanzanians and Somalis operate along the Rovuma river in northern Mozambique. Officers believe an African Task Force would give them more power to address corruption within their own customs, police and armed forces. The delegates, from Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia hope the anti-smuggling task force will be operational in 12 months.
19940318000000000	FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Poland (35): Where the bison roam free - Bronwen Maddox visits an unspoiled wilderness where wildlife abounds. The long, scuffed tracks in the snow between the trees give some warning. But it is still a shock when the black, shaggy bulk of a bison, one of the largest and rarest wild creatures in Europe, emerges out of the forest shadows at the roadside. Poland's environment contains some of Europe's extremes: Silesian filth in the south-west, and undisturbed wilderness in the east. The government is keen for the wilder regions to attract tourism. But while Polish environmentalists are worried about the impact of development, so far the remoter regions remain astonishingly unspoiled. Two hours east from Warsaw, the road becomes entangled in the Biebrzy marshes - 100 kilometres of peat bog, the largest in Europe. Naturalists recite its catalogue of wildlife with reverence: 36 species of fish and 235 species of birds, which make it a stopping point on the north-south migration routes. When it floods in the spring, it becomes half land, half water; horses become stranded trying to cross it, people resort to dinghies, and only the marshes' 400 wild moose, with huge, splayed hooves, can venture across safely. The real heart of the Polish wilderness, however, is still further east. The Bialowieza, Europe's last primeval forest, is a dark, ungroomed tangle of oak and ash, straddling the border with Belarus. For years the region has been a twilight zone of half-forgotten villages connected by potholed roads. The ethnic and religious homogeneity of much of Poland yields to a central European medley; the small Ukrainian and Belarus communities are marked by the domed spires and double-barred crosses of Orthodox churches. The region's isolation has helped preserve species rare elsewhere. Golden-beaked eagles crouch in the grass over dead chickens, while wild boar gouge troughs in the snow looking for nuts, and the deeper forest recesses conceal lynx and wolves. But the undisputed pride of the forest is the bison, coaxed back from near extinction after the war, when only six were left alive. The forests, formerly hunting grounds for aristocrats, were protected as a nature reserve under communism. After careful breeding, there are now 251 bison roaming the forests in dozen-strong bands, 37 in compounds at the forest's centre, and another 300 on the Belorus side of the border. Taller and slimmer than the North American buffalo, their heads are larger and thrust further forward. Adult males weigh up to 1,000 kilos, with foot-long pointed horns. 'They have a wild temper - there is no possibility of a person touching them,' say the foresters. Mr Zbigniew Krasinski, head of bison research at the reserve, says: 'We are looking for signs of problems because the genetic pool is so small, such as a drop in fertility or physical deformation. But so far we have found none.' Poaching is a concern - hunters do not attack the bison directly, but their snares entangle the animals' muzzles and hooves. So is the antagonism of farmers bordering the forest, whose crops are regularly raided by adventurous herds. But one of the reserve's most controversial tasks is keeping down the numbers - the bison, which mainly eat grass, also strip the bark from ash and oak. The reserve exports as many bison as it can to other regions of Poland and abroad. However, it still must shoot several dozen a year to keep the population stable. The staff 'pick the ones with defects - those which are weaker, or were late calves, or limp', says Mr Krasinski. Bialowieza has rejected the route taken by other Polish reserves in the north-east and south-east where hunters are permitted to pay to shoot the bison for sport. According to Mr Krasinski, the right to shoot a large bison with impressive horns - 'a gold model' animal - fetches about DM11,000 (Dollars 6,250). 'Maybe shooting would be profitable but there is a strong lobby of environmentalists who say 'not in the Bialowieza - you can't shoot the king of forest in his castle',' says Mr Krasinski. That decision leaves the reserve with slender finances. It enjoyed 100,000 visitors a year before 1989, mainly large expeditions from state factories, but now receives only 60,000, of which only 5,000 come from outside Poland. The foresters are sanguine, however. 'We don't want mass tourism here', says Mr Krasinski. 'Sure, money is a problem, but somehow we always manage.'
19940406000000000	FT  06 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: Conservation conflict - A look at the issues behind Richard Leakey's stormy exit from the Kenya Wildlife Service. It takes an unconventional man to rescue a nation's wildlife from the clutches of ivory poachers, smuggling syndicates and real estate barons. But last month, Richard Leakey broke with all convention by doing something unheard of in Africa. He resigned from a government post on a point of principle, and he did so publicly, challenging the wisdom of new presidential directives on wildlife management in Kenya. Leakey's stormy exit from the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) dismayed conservationists at home and abroad. It has also shaken the Kenyan establishment, which had been trying to project a cleaner international image after the corruption scandals of recent years. To foreign donors, Leakey represented the new face of public service in Kenya. He was a man who had taken over a corrupt and dispirited government department in 1989 and transformed it into a dynamic entity, with the freedom to cut through red tape and resist political interference. Leakey sacked 1,640 staff, re-introduced a shoot-to-kill policy against game poachers, and campaigned for an international ban on ivory. Pictures of President Daniel arap Moi setting fire to pyres of captured elephant tusks broadcast to the world Kenya's renewed commitment to the protection of wild animals. Leakey believed Kenya's rich wildlife, which underpins a tourist industry worth Dollars 450m (Pounds 308m) a year, could be managed in a profitable and sustainable manner. Donors, including the World Bank and Britain's Overseas Development Agency, backed his plans by pledging Dollars 300m for KWS projects over the next 10 years. Leakey's acrimonious departure has left Moi's government with a public relations disaster. Noah Katana Ngala, the tourism and wildlife minister, called Leakey's resignation a 'criminal act by a senior civil servant'. Donors must unravel a knottier issue: they must decide whether the funds pledged for conservation are safe from political predators. The omens are not good. Over the past four years, Leakey says, he withstood the attempts of 'land-grabbing' politicians to appropriate chunks of Kenya's wildlife sanctuaries to develop hotels or mining concessions. He believes their failure led to a smear campaign. In January, Leakey stood accused of racism, arrogance and corruption, and he faced a secret government probe into the workings of KWS. He left his post in January, was recalled by the president in March, and resigned again two weeks later, saying the government had placed impossible restrictions on the director's job. He cited only two of the new directives. Armed rangers of KWS anti-poaching units were to be placed under the authority of the Commissioner of Police. 'I foresaw problems,' Leakey says. 'If you have two units carrying arms, patrolling an area the size of Northern Ireland, who is the boss?' Leakey also says he was ordered to spend 75 per cent of KWS resources outside national parks, on the novel reasoning that three-quarters of Kenya's animals live outside protected areas. 'Our aim was to manage wildlife in key tourist destinations because tourism is the biggest foreign exchange earner in Kenya,' he says. Leakey concluded that the KWS dream of a 'self-financing, efficient, and effective, publicly owned, but independent conservation authority' was not viable under the new directives. However, Hilary Ng'weno, chairman of the KWS board of trustees, insists there has been no change in KWS policy. He says the board is discussing the recommendations of the government's probe committee - more than 100 of them  -not all of which might prove feasible. Ng'weno does not appear to lament Leakey's departure. The chairman conspicuously failed to come to Leakey's defence when he was under attack for racism and indifference to the needs of communities bordering game reserves. 'If one man wants to take credit for everything KWS does, he should be prepared to take the blame for its failures,' Ng'weno says. The rift between the two men appears to have become deeper after an air crash in September which cost Leakey both his legs. Ng'weno says the board played a more active role during Leakey's convalescence abroad. They were unhappy with the high salaries of certain senior managers, who nevertheless appeared unable to act without their mentor. 'Leakey's stewardship was faulty in that it didn't distinguish the captain from the ship,' Ng'weno says. Yet this fusion of identity worked to the government's advantage while Leakey was fund-raising abroad. With Dollars 300m pledged towards conservation in Kenya, it appears that Leakey had outlived his use. Like others before him, he was discarded by Moi. The World Bank, which had earmarked Dollars 60m for wildlife management in Kenya, is concerned about the upheaval at KWS. 'We felt the projects were progressing well under Leakey's stewardship,' says Agi Kiss, a World Bank official. It is, however, difficult for donors to side openly with Leakey, a white Kenyan with 25 years of public service, without incurring charges of favouritism or racial bias. Kenyans are sensitive to statements that might imply that black Africans are more susceptible to corruption or ineptitude than whites. Leakey's successor, however, is a white Kenyan. David Western has solid credentials in the field of conservation and is reported to be on good terms with William ole Ntimama, the minister for local government who led the attacks against Leakey. Conservation will be the least of Western's worries at KWS. New policies are needed to curb the growing conflict between people living and farming near sanctuary areas and the wildlife - a need Leakey admits he was slow to address. Local councils, starved of central government funds and short of patronage, are also eager to wrestle game park revenues from KWS - gate fees alone earn Dollars 1m a month. Western, who inherits an army of game wardens, vehicles and surveillance aircraft, will have to avoid the charges of empire-building that hounded his predecessor from office. 'Will the new director be able to resist the political pressures on KWS?' asks Leakey. He wishes him luck.
19940510000000000	FT  10 MAY 94 / Survey of Kenya (18): A fresh start after the storm - Conservation is about people as well as wildlife. To many observers, Richard Leakey's stormy departure from the Kenya Wildlife Service revealed the sinister side of Kenyan politics. His success in saving Kenya's wildlife from the clutches of ivory poachers, and his fund-raising efforts abroad, put Leakey on a collision course with those in government who envied his independence and coveted the aid dollars flowing into KWS conservation projects. Before Mr Leakey's appointment in 1989, Kenya's wildlife was being decimated by gangs of armed brigands who roamed the country with impunity. Three-quarters of the elephant population and almost the entire rhino herd had been slaughtered. Attacks on tourists were on the rise. Mr Leakey began the new regime at KWS by sacking 1,640 staff suspected of corruption. He re-introduced a shoot-to-kill policy against game poachers, and campaigned for an international ban on the ivory trade. He believed Kenya's wildlife, which underpins a Dollars 350m-a-year tourist industry, could be managed in a profitable and sustainable manner. Donors, including the World Bank and Britain's Overseas Development Agency, backed his plans by pledging Dollars 300m for KWS projects over 10 years. To foreign donors, Mr Leakey represented the new face of public service. He was a man who had taken over a corrupt and dispirited government department and transformed it into a dynamic parastatal, with the freedom to cut through red tape and resist political meddling. Suddenly, in January, he came under attack for arrogance, racism and corruption. He was told he faced a secret government probe into the workings of KWS. Neither President Moi nor the KWS board of trustees rallied to his defence as senior government figures, led by William ole Ntimama, the minister for local government, called for his resignation. Mr Leakey believes the smear campaign was orchestrated by 'land-grabbing' politicians, whom the KWS had frustrated in their attempts to appropriate vast chunks of Kenya's wildlife sanctuaries to develop hotel resorts or mining concessions. He left the director's post in January, was recalled by the president in March, and resigned again barely two weeks later, saying the government had placed impossible restrictions on his job. Mr Leakey's acrymonious departure dismayed conservationists in Kenya and abroad. It also raised alarm bells in the donor community, who began to fear their conservation grants might fall prey to political predators. The government appears to have acknowledged their concern, for instead of naming a politician to head KWS, it appointed another white Kenyan with solid credentials in the field of conservation. David Western has a tough act to follow. He must persuade the donor community that their conservation funds are in safe hands. He must avoid charges of empire-building while being in control of an area the size of Northern Ireland. And he must maintain the trust of government to be allowed to command an irregular army of game wardens, reconnaissance vehicles and surveillance aircraft. He is also aware of the political machinations which hounded his predecessor from office, and says land-grabbing politicians will have no better luck with him. Significantly, Mr Western obtained the reversal of two presidential directives which caused Mr Leakey to resign: the armed Wildlife Protection Unit will no longer be placed under the authority of the commissioner of police; and KWS will regain its financial autonomy from the Tourism and Wildlife Ministry. Mr Western, however, believes that, under Mr Leakey's stewardship, KWS had laid itself open to charges that it was more concerned about animals than people. An acute shortage of arable and grazing land, coupled with Kenya's rapid population growth, have brought communities to the borders of wildlife sanctuaries. Elephants trample crops. People are maimed, sometimes killed, by predators. A ban on culling means that wild animals and farming communities live in increasingly uneasy coexistence. 'There was a lack of sensitivity to how critical the issue had become,' Mr Western says. He intends to redress the issue by focusing on the 'people side' of conservation. He wants to promote landowners' associations, and encourage them to present their proposals for community-based conservation projects. He believes certain policies, such as the introduction of culling or hunting licenses, might be less controversial if they came from local communities. But the bottom line is money. Local communities, and local politicians in particular, feel they are not getting their fair share of wildlife revenues. For Mr Western, juggling the competing financial demands of wildlife and people will be the toughest act of all.
19941121000000000	FT  21 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Rare species. It is possible that, within years, tigers could become extinct. The conference to update the Cites convention on endangered species, which concluded this weekend in Florida, made that clear. Would extinction matter? On one view, it might not: the loss would pose no immediate threat to human health or wealth. But on several counts, it is worth putting effort into saving rare species. In western eyes, tigers, elephants, whales and the like are romantic beasts, whose existence is valued even by those who never see a live specimen. For local communities, the animals can add greatly to tourism revenues. For all countries, the animals represent a pool of genes which has potential value. What is the best means of saving these species? The threats they face are poachers who want to sell tusks, hides and meat for profit, farmers who resent the damage they do, and the steady encroachment of human societies into wild habitats. The essence of the task is to give people an economic incentive to keep the animals' numbers at sustainable levels. But there are two particular problems. One is that, as some east and central African countries have found, the benefits of the live animals, through tourism, generally go to the government and companies, while the value of dead animals is received by poachers and farmers. Governments have found it hard to redistribute the benefits of tourism at a local level. Second, demand for products such as rhino horn, driven largely by Asian markets, has not yet been checked by rising prices. Given the disparity between Asian wealth and African poverty, it is possible that species would be extinct before prices rose by enough to choke demand. One solution is simply to improve enforcement of national rules against killing animals. South Africa, which devotes considerable resources to protecting its wildlife, has found numbers of elephant and white rhino growing rapidly, even though it allows limited domestic trade in ivory. But that requires funds which are beyond the resources of poorer countries. One of the best arguments for maintaining an international ban against trade in products of endangered species is that it makes guarding the animals easier and cheaper even for the poorest states. The Worldwide Fund for Nature estimates that the budgets for protecting elephants have dropped by nearly 90 per cent in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Tanzania since the worldwide ban on ivory trade in 1989 A third device is to reduce demand for the products. Environmental groups argue that since the start of the ivory ban, the price of ivory has fallen - where it can be obtained - while the price of rhino horn has increased. That is, they say, partly because the main markets for ivory were in western countries which have enforced tough import controls on ivory. Meanwhile, western public opinion has turned against ivory, There is no single solution to the problem of supporting rare species. But the Cites conference was right to uphold the ban on elephant and white rhino products, as one of several mechanisms. The next useful step would be to increase pressure on those governments which have so far taken a relaxed attitude towards import of banned products.
