10000000000000000	Saving Tourists and Tourism What impacts have attacks on tourists had on a government s economy  What steps have authorities taken to decrease these attacks  What tactics have authorities and businesses tried to lessen the impacts.
19891119000000000	VISITORS FIND SOVIET TRIP CAN BE RISKY BUSINESS; TOURISM: CRIMES AGAINST TRAVELERS TO THE SOVIET UNION ARE UP THIS YEAR. AMONG THE WORST CITIES ARE MOSCOW AND LENINGRAD.. Tourists beware: The Soviet Union is not the "safe" travel destination it once was. Crime is up 33.3% this year, according to Tass, the official Soviet news agency. The news is worse when you look at the figures for violent crimes (up 42.4%), property crimes (up 54.1%) and street crimes (up 77.1%). And more bad news: Among the areas where street crime is the worst are the prime tourist cities of Moscow and Leningrad. Tass reported that between January and July of this year, 2,000 crimes were committed against foreigners. Eighty-five percent of those were property crimes, it said. The situation is so serious that authorities recently decided to set up a special police force to deal with crime against foreigners in 46 cities in the Soviet Union, the official Communist daily paper, Pravda, reported. "They have to do something. They're anxious not to lose tourists," said Mark Sanna, regional security officer at the American Embassy in Moscow, which works closely with the local police. How to stay safe? Police here warn tourists not to enter into negotiations with black marketeers or prostitutes for the sale of foreign currency or other goods such as clothes or electronics. Most of the crimes against foreigners were committed during these negotiations, Tass reported. But Western diplomats consider taxis the most dangerous items for tourists. The mildest crime tourists may encounter with taxi drivers is their demand for foreign currency. It is illegal to deal in foreign currency in the Soviet Union and for Soviets to own it. But tourists leaving hotels more often than not find that drivers refuse to take them anywhere in exchange for rubles. And they are demanding exorbitant rates: $15 to $20 for a 3-ruble (about 50 cents U.S.) ride. "Tourists, especially those at the Cosmos Hotel on the outskirts of the city, feel trapped," one Moscow-based Western diplomat explained. "They don't know the language. Because they can't read the (Cyrillic) alphabet, it's difficult for them to ride the subways, so they are more dependent on taxis than they may be in other countries." More frightening was the diplomat's account of reports at other embassies of theft at knifepoint by taxi drivers. "One taxi will take you from the airport. About halfway to the city, another taxi will cut off the one you are a passenger in. The other taxi driver threatens you at knifepoint while your driver looks on helplessly. We expect they are operating as a team," the diplomat said. Indeed, Brazilian journalist Jose Arbex reported his story to the Soviet weekly newspaper Moscow News after he was robbed in this fashion, to warn other foreigners. He lost $1,370 in the robbery. And Sanna said he receives six to seven reports a month of embassy staff being robbed in taxis. It's more expensive, but tourists may want to book drivers from the Intourist agencies at the airport and the hotels, one diplomat advised. She added that in another twist on the taxi scam, gangsters watch passengers getting into cabs with saleable items such as VCRs, then follow the taxi to the customer's home or hotel. That home or room then becomes the target of a break-in. The problem has grown to such an extent that Tass recently reported that the manager of the Soviet taxi agency promised to put lookouts at hotels and other tourist spots to watch for potential problems. Though foreigners who live here are less likely to use cabs because they often have their own cars and drivers, they still risk being robbed either on the street or through break-ins of their apartments or cars. Sanna said embassy personnel frequently have their pockets picked along a bridge leading from the embassy to the Ukraine Hotel, an Intourist hotel that attracts criminal elements who want foreign currency. He warned that tourist sites such as Novodevichy Convent, where former Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev is buried, are other popular pick-pocket areas. Sue Meadows, director of day care and the preschool center at the American Embassy, was a robbery victim while shopping at the Georgian market -- another hot tourist spot -- in Moscow. She was "jostled and pushed while she was carrying our 2-year-old and walking with our 7- and 8-year-olds," her husband Doug said. "When she got to our car, she realized that her purse had been unzipped and her wallet with all her credit cards and foreign currency stolen." That wasn't the first time the Meadowses have been victims of crime in Moscow. Foreigners posted to Moscow live in compounds guarded by militia men whose job it is to report on their activities. However, as Soviet society continues to open through glasnost, some of these "mili men," as Westerners call them, have been withdrawn from residence compounds. Said Meadows, manager of the agricultural product department at DuPont's Moscow office, whose building has no mili man: "Our car has been broken into three times this year and our radio/cassette player and speakers stolen. In addition, we heard there was a break-in in an apartment on the top floor of our building." The weekly newspaper Nedelya recently reported that there were 4,000 break-ins in private apartments in Moscow last year. For foreigners with VCRs that can be sold for up to 11,000 rubles on the black market, the fears of break-ins are growing. Residents at a new foreign compound in Moscow that opened this summer without a mili man organized a petition after several break-ins of apartments and cars, and finally got 24-hour guard duty. Said John Lombard, Moscow bureau chief for the Australian Broadcasting Corp., whose wife Jean organized the petition: "The rising crime rate is quite significant. I don't feel personally threatened when I'm outside, but if you're a single woman walking back from the metro out here, you probably aren't too comfortable." Carey Goldberg, a Moscow-based free-lance reporter for the Boston Globe who lives in the same building, agrees. "I feel less safe now than I used to. It used to be a plus to look like a foreigner. I felt as if it gave you immunity to crime. Now I play it down. "I bought dull-colored coats to try to look more Soviet because I'm more afraid of robbery now, though I'm not worried about being assaulted. I think people here are greedy for foreign currency, but they are not violent." But Sanna of the American Embassy said he has had reports from two American students who were raped here since January. And, he said, another diplomat was attacked on the street. Her assailants tried to push her into a cab, but she bit one of them on the wrist and escaped. "But she was traumatized," he said. In a country where Westerners have access to food, clothing, electronic goods and other consumer items that Soviets do not, it is not surprising that the crime rate is increasing as Soviets become frustrated with their plummeting standard of living. "The gap is growing. You feel like the aristocracy now. It's uncomfortable," Goldberg said. Robert Tonsing, a Moscow-based free-lance photographer from California, said he and his wife, Ann Imso, a correspondent with the Associated Press here, are lucky. "Nobody's even stolen our windshield wipers (a much-in-demand commodity)." But, he added, "I have a foreign car; I'm a marked target. I don't worry too much about being robbed, but I don't go to bad parts of the city, either. "One friend visiting us had his car broken into and his wallet and papers stolen within five minutes of parking his car in a bad section of the city. Though his car was a Lada, it was identified by its plates (which have different colors for foreigners) as being a foreigner's car." Once aware of the potential problems, most here agree, tourists should be able to avoid them by being careful. And as several Americans said: "I still feel safer walking around here than I do in New York City."
19920817000000000	FT  17 AUG 92 / Call to curb crime in Kenya. The International Federation of Tour Operators (Ifto) is to ask Kenya to establish a tourist police force in an attempt to reduce crime against visitors, Michael Skapinker writes. The call follows a number of widely publicised attacks on tourists in Kenya which, tour operators say, have led to a fall in bookings. Ifto, which represents tour operators in 17 countries, hopes to send a delegation to Kenya at the end of this month to discuss improving safety for tourists. Ifto will also ask for stricter licensing of drivers involved in the tourist industry.
19921023000000000	FT  23 OCT 92 / Islamic zealotry presents Cairo with hard choices. IF ANY doubts lingered about a resurgent Islamic movement in Egypt, they will have been dispelled by a string of incidents in the past months, culminating in Wednesday's slaying of a British tourist. The killing of 28-year-old Ms Sharon Hill by gunmen, who ambushed her tour bus near the extremist stronghold of Assiut south of Cairo, could hardly have delivered a more unpleasant message to a government seemingly bereft of new ideas as to how to deal with the fundamentalist challenge. For a hard-pressed country whose fortunes are heavily dependent on tourism revenues - now easily Egypt's main foreign exchange earner apart from workers' remittances - it was a disturbing development which the authorities cannot ignore. The death of Sharon Hill may come to be regarded as a critical moment in the continuing war between the security forces and Islamic extremists. If nothing else, it underscored the enormous difficulties faced by the authorities in combating zealots, now well established in the dusty, decaying towns and villages of the Egyptian hinterland. The episode is almost certain to add to persistent domestic criticism, some of it voiced from within the ruling National Democratic Party, of methods used to cope with the many faces of the Islamic tendency. Official tactics have been to seek to co-opt the Islamicists by allowing the ostensibly moderate mainstream Moslem Brotherhood limited access to institutions such as parliament, while cracking down hard on militants who espouse a more confrontational Islam. But an increasing problem for the authorities is how to distinguish between the mainstream and zealots committed to the violent overthrow of the established order. While formal links may not exist, the two streams share a common interest in getting rid of the status quo. As President Hosni Mubarak and his advisers review options available to them in light of the latest rash of incidents - a Nile ferry was fired on earlier this month, among other instances of Islamic-inspired violence - the temptation will be to crack down even harder on individuals suspected of association with the al-gama'a al-Islamiyah or Islamic groups, but this is likely to prove counter-productive. The government risks further alienating individuals who already feel confined to the margins of society without jobs or the reasonable hope of a better life. Throughout Egypt, disaffected youth is inevitably drawn to the deceptively simple proposition that 'Islam is the solution' to all their problems. Many Egyptian liberals, who feel increasingly beleaguered in the face of the Islamic tide, are openly critical of what they regard as the government's failure to deal effectively with the threat of extremism. These critics advocate more openness rather than more repression, and a greater commitment to democracy to allow countervailing secular forces to flower. They fault the government for seeking to co-opt the fundamentalists by facilitating increased religious influence in the education system and in the media. These tools are now being used, critics say, to undermine Egypt's broadly secular institutions.
19921027000000000	FT  27 OCT 92 / Extremists' knife enters near Egypt's heart: The threat to tourism from the recent attacks on foreigners. LAST MONTH Mr Fouad Sultan, Egypt's tourism minister, boasted that the country had 'the least terrorism of all the countries of the world. . . .' and that 'everything is under control'. Mr Sultan, regarded as one of the better performers of a generally lacklustre Egyptian administration, could be excused for wondering whether he might not have erred by tempting fate. A sudden rash of Islamic extremist violence against tourists is endangering the country's multi-billion dollar tourism industry at a time when it was achieving spectacular growth rates and new investment was pouring into the sector. The slaying last Wednesday of a British tourist south of Cairo and the stabbings at the weekend of Russian visitors to Port Said at the entrance to the Suez Canal have cast a pall over an industry that had been reaping tremendous rewards since the end of the Gulf war. Together with concern engendered by the Cairo earthquake which killed up to 600 people (none of them tourists) these latest incidents have drawn unwelcome attention to the possible dangers of Third World travel, especially in a country where Islamic extremism is on the rise. Tour operators and large hotels contacted in Cairo yesterday said they were experiencing cancellations among both individuals and, more worryingly, tour groups - the lifeblood of the industry. The Cairo Marriott said that tour operators were reporting that group numbers would be down by as much as 20 per cent. Italian groups - tourism from Italy has been booming - were prominent among those notifying cancellations. Foreign embassies in Cairo, sensitive to the importance of tourism to the hard-pressed Egyptian economy, have been guarded in their comments on dangers to visitors, but most western missions have felt obliged, in response to inquiries, to point out the risks In London, Thomson, the UK's biggest travel company, said it saw no reason at the moment to be concerned about future bookings or the safety of its 700 customers currently in Egypt. The company, which takes 25,000 tourists to Egypt annually, said: 'These are isolated incidents, just as there was another bombing in London on Sunday night.' Thomson said it had had 'one or two' cancellations. Kuoni Travel, which carries 15,000 UK tourists to Egypt a year, said it had one cancellation last Friday. Mr Martin Thompson, managing director of Abercrombie & Kent Travel, an upmarket operator, said: 'We believe that people should not go off the beaten track in Egypt.' The company, which takes 11,000 tourists to Egypt each year from the UK, the US and Australia, said: 'We're keeping our ears close to the ground both here and in Cairo. But nobody in London has cancelled so far.' However, Egyptian tour operators fear a return of the gloomy Gulf war period and its aftermath during which Nile ferries sailed empty and hotel occupancy rates plummeted. With investment of more than USDollars 1bn planned for an industry which is Egypt's biggest foreign currency earner, apart from workers' remittances, the stakes are high. A million Egyptians are estimated to derive their livelihood either directly or indirectly from the tourism sector, which contributes 6 per cent of gross domestic product. Barring accidents, Mr Sultan had predicted that numbers of visitors would grow to 5m annually by financial year 1994/95. This would represent a 400 per cent increase in tourist numbers in a decade, and there remains scope for further growth. Hotel room capacity in Egypt has more than doubled since 1985 to 53,000, barely keeping pace with demand. Another 14,000 are under construction and there are plans for more. Businessmen with projects already under way are unlikely to be deflected by the recent troubles, but those planning to make commitments may pause; for whatever officials might say about internal stability, there is increasing concern about a surge in fundamentalist violence amid growing signs of disaffection with the established order. Unless, the authorities can find a way to neutralise Islamic militants, prospects are for more rather than less trouble. Ominously, extremists under the umbrella of al-gama'a al-Islamiya (literally, Islamic groups) appear to have decided to target visitors as a means of undermining the government's authority. Anonymous spokesmen have, since August, been threatening to strike at tourists and tourist installations. That they have now made good their threats suggests that a rudimentary network exists to carry out pin-prick attacks. The militants may have found the government's Achilles heel.
19921113000000000	FT  13 NOV 92 / German tourists attacked in Egypt. Five German tourists and two Egyptians were wounded yesterday when gunmen described by police as Moslem militants opened fire on their bus in Qena in the southern Nile valley, Reuter reports from Cairo. It was the fourth serious attack on tourists since Moslem militants fighting an underground war with the government warned in September that tourists would not be safe in Qena province, site of some of Egypt's most famous Pharaonic temples and tombs. The government has reacted vigorously to the spate of attacks on tourists, promising to fly helicopter patrols over tourist areas and vowing tougher police measures against the militants. This week it announced all mosques would be put under state control.
19930216000000000	FT  16 FEB 93 / Terrorism costs Egypt Dollars 700m in lost earnings from tourists. MR FOUAD SULTAN, Egypt's tourism minister, said yesterday that Moslem militant attacks on foreign tourists had cost the country Dollars 700m (Pounds 496m), Reuter reports from Cairo. Despite tough security measures taken by the government to safeguard the country's main source of foreign currency, hoteliers and tourist operators say business is slack. Mr Sultan said militant attacks, in which one British woman was killed and two Britons and five Germans were wounded late last year, caused a 20 per cent reduction in revenues compared with the same period the year before. 'Between Dollars 60m and Dollars 70m is lost in receipts each month. The losses have reached about Dollars 700m so far,' Mr Sultan said. 'If that pace continues, the losses in the fiscal year 1992-93 (which ends in June) will reach about Dollars 1bn.' He said that when calculating revenues based on government forecasts, the losses could be even more. Egypt had expected 4m visitors for the fiscal year 1992-93 and more than Dollars 4bn in revenues. Mr Sultan said in the year 1991-92 an estimated 3m tourists visited Egypt, generating Dollars 3.5bn. He said the tourism industry accounted for 30 per cent of Egypt's foreign currency receipts and 10 per cent of its gross domestic product. Many people employed in the tourism business fear for their jobs. The pyramids and ancient Pharaonic temples - Egypt's main tourist attractions - are virtually empty. Luxury hotels, tourist villages and Red Sea beaches are quiet. Egyptian hoteliers are nostalgic about the boom days. Boats and river cruisers lie idle along the banks of the Nile waiting for clients. Souvenir shops have everything except shoppers.
19930311000000000	FT  11 MAR 93 / Egyptian crackdown leaves 14 militants dead. EGYPTIAN security forces have shot and killed 14 alleged militants in a bloody two-day crackdown on Islamic groups behind recent attacks on tourists. At least four policemen, a woman and a child also died in the raids - among the bloodiest clashes in Egypt in a decade. Thirteen people died in shootouts in and around Cairo yesterday as police and special operations officers launched nine dawn raids on alleged Islamic militant hideouts. A further seven alleged militants died in a clash on Tuesday night after police surrounded a mosque in Aswan, the popular tourist resort in Upper Egypt. The incident is only the second in Aswan since the recent spate of violence in Egypt. Two police officers guarding a church were shot dead by militants on March 6 and Tuesday's raid appears to have followed a tough police response to the attacks. The police crackdown is the harshest and most violent yet in the government's continuing fight against the Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the shadowy Islamic militant group which claims to be behind recent attacks on tourists. There have been few more violent clashes between police and alleged extremists since the aftermath of President Sadat's assassination in 1981. Police have rounded up hundreds, and possibly thousands of alleged Gama'a al-Islamiyya activists since attacks on tourists began last summer and clashes between militants and police have been sustained at a low level over the past several months leaving, by some estimates, 15 dead and 33 wounded before the last two days' violence. But yesterday's raids appear to signal a new resolve within the government to bear down even more heavily on the militant groups, whose attacks on foreign visitors have devastated the country's tourism industry. Cancellations are estimated by the government to be costing Dollars 70m (Pounds 49m) a month. President Hosni Mubarak said in a recent US newspaper interview that he was prepared to use a 'very heavy hand' against the Islamic militants. Saying that he believed their attacks had peaked, he nevertheless told the Washington Post: 'I'll be very strict with them. I'm very strict with these people for the sake of the country and the people.' An Interior Ministry statement yesterday said that the series of raids, which took place in central, northern and western Cairo, led to several arrests, including that of two un-named men claimed to be among the 'top leadership' of the Gama'a al-Islamiyya. The ministry said several guns and explosives were also seized.
19930327000000000	FT  27 MAR 93 / When terror takes a toll: How international tourist destinations are affected by political violence. A year ago, the Cairo Sheraton hotel was 75 per cent full. This month, 41 per cent of its rooms are occupied. Some Cairo hotels are just over a third full. One five-star hotel is charging only Dollars 28 a room. The Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the Islamic militant group which is seeking to destabilise the Egyptian government, has deliberately targeted the country's tourist industry. Late last year, gunmen shot at tour buses in Upper Egypt, killing one British visitor. Earlier this year, two visitors were killed when a bomb exploded in a cafe in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Mr Fouad Sultan, the tourism minister, says earnings are down by a fifth on last year. Many in the industry consider that an underestimate. The tourist ministry has hired Burson-Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations company, and Saatchi & Saatchi to help improve the country's image. While terrorism and the murder of foreign visitors can substantially damage a nation's tourism, the effect differs widely from country to country. As Egypt agonises over how to salvage its fastest growing industry and biggest foreign currency earner, the tourist businesses of other countries have been largely unaffected by terrorist and criminal violence. Third world destinations appear to suffer more than developed countries from attacks on tourists. Kenyan tourism was badly hit last year as a result of publicity surrounding the trial of two game rangers accused of the murder of British tourist Julie Ward in 1988, and by reports of other attacks on tourists. By contrast, the murder of a British visitor in Florida last year had little effect on the state's tourism. Thomson, the UK's biggest travel group, said that while the depreciation of the pound against the dollar had deterred some British travellers, reports of violence had little effect. Similarly, Egyptian tourism has been much more severely affected by terrorist incidents than the industries in the UK or the US. Despite years of widely-reported deaths and injuries from IRA bombs, the British tourist industry has suffered little long-term damage. Mr Alan Jefferson, the British Tourist Authority's international marketing director, says his offices abroad usually receive no more than a handful of calls after IRA attacks. One New York travel agent said that, while some US tourists about to leave for the UK had asked about recent IRA bombs, they had decided to go ahead with their trips. The UK tourist industry has been more severely affected by events elsewhere. The US bombing of Libya in 1986 contributed to a 4 per cent fall in visitors to 13.9m, as Americans, fearing terrorist reprisals, stayed at home. The Gulf War resulted in tourists to the UK falling to 16.7m in 1991, from 18m the year before. In the US, the bombing of New York's World Trade Centre last month produced 'no significant cancellations', according to the city's Convention and Visitors Bureau. Airlines servicing the New York area also say that there has been very little impact on passenger traffic. The National Parks Service reports that the number of visitors to New York attractions such as the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island ran at about 3,500-4,000 daily during February, a typical number for the month. While tourist destinations such as Egypt and Kenya might feel they are the victims of double standards, travel industry executives say they suffer from a perception that they are societies under siege. The futures of the US and British governments are not perceived as being threatened by violent crime or terrorism. Although the IRA has bombed areas frequented by tourists, foreign visitors to the UK have not been specific targets as they have in Egypt. Mr Peter Kerkar, chief executive of Cox & Kings Travel, a London-based company, argues that American visitors to the UK are behaving quite logically in ignoring IRA attacks but staying at home during the Gulf War and in the wake of the bombing of Libya. 'The IRA is not singling out Americans. If they're involved in an IRA incident, it's because of bad luck. In the case of Libya, Americans were a target.' One British travel industry manager points out that Florida, while plagued by violent crime, offers tourists a sense of safety, however illusory, that countries such as Kenya and Egypt do not. 'America is familiar territory, where everyone speaks the same language and where half the TV programmes are the ones you see at home.' Mr Martin Brackenbury, president of the International Federation of Tour Operators, says there are a few general principles which countries can apply when attempting to limit the damage caused to tourism by violence. 'The first is: never attempt to cover up. Clearly admit a problem if there is one. The second is to put in place measures which can clearly be seen to be effective,' he says. He says Kenya has responded constructively to Ifto recommendations. The Kenyan government has begun aerial surveillance of game parks and has issued advice about which areas of Nairobi are considered dangerous. Mr Martin Thompson, managing director of the London-based tour operator Abercrombie & Kent, says his business to Kenya fell to 30,000 travellers last year from 34,000 in 1991 as a result of press coverage of violence in the country. However, he expects business to return to 1991 levels this year. The Egyptian authorities, after initially criticising the western media for what it described as a biased, exaggerated campaign, is now taking active steps to restore the country's image. It has supplied more tourist police, troops and helicopters to protect visitors at sites in Upper Egypt. Both the government and the country's tourism industry are now hoping that this iron-fisted policy will stem the terrorist attacks. Mr Taher el-Sharif, chairman of the Egyptian Businessman's Association says: 'The problem is we just don't know when this will stop - unlike the Gulf War, when we knew there would eventually be an end.' Mr Brackenbury says that once a destination is perceived as being safer, recovery for the tourist industry can be swift. 'People's memories are short,' he says. Reporting by Michael Skapinker, Nikki Tait and Mark Nicholson
19930406000000000	FT  06 APR 93 / Kenya's tourist industry suffers big fall in revenue. TOURISM in Kenya dropped sharply last year, reducing hard currency revenues from the industry to Dollars 295m from Dollars 400m (Pounds 195m from Pounds 266m) in 1991, a government official said yesterday, Reuter reports from Nairobi. Mr Philemon Mwaisaka, permanent secretary at the ministry of tourism, blamed the sharp downturn in visits to safari parks or Indian Ocean beaches on reports in western countries, where most visitors come from, about attacks on tourists, tribal violence and political unrest. 'Imagined insecurity in Kenya had convinced European-based tourists that the country was not safe,' he said. The run-up to December's first multi-party polls in 26 years was marred by tribal violence. This, coupled with bandit attacks on tourists, led to a fall in hotel bookings of up to 60,000 bed-nights in the last five months of 1992, tourism officials say. Last year, some 700,000 tourists visited Kenya after a record 814,000 in 1991. But many, enticed by cheap bucket-shop deals, kept their wallets closed while in the country. Mr Mwaisaka said the government was fighting back with a vigorous campaign to revitalise the industry and woo visitors. He said security in national parks would be stepped up, more roads would be built and accommodation would be improved. 'Protection of endangered species like elephants and rhinos has received priority,' he added. 'Poaching has been reduced to almost zero and an elaborate security network put in place to ensure tourists' safety and increased comfort,' he added. The government has also begun aerial surveillance of game parks and issued advice about which areas of Nairobi are considered dangerous. Fears for the safety of tourists have been fuelled by attacks in game parks, particularly the Masai Mara reserve. Germany and the US have warned their nationals not to go to parks while Britain and Australia have cautioned against travel in parks when unaccompanied by rangers. Kenya, which rejected International Monetary Fund and World Bank-backed reforms last month, badly needs tourists to help purchase essential imports and service a Dollars 7.1bn foreign debt. President Daniel arap Moi, angered over an IMF refusal to reinstate critical balance of payments support of around Dollars 40m a month, two weeks ago called a halt to liberalisation policies and said Kenya would go its own way.
19930422000000000	FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (11): The wrong sort of shooting - Attacks on tourists have damaged tourism. This had been billed as a record breaking year. The tourism ministry had pencilled-in possible receipts of Dollars 4bn from an expected 4m visitors for the 1992/93 season, at least Dollars 1bn better than the year earlier. The private sector was more bullish. 'The whole industry was shooting for Dollars 5bn this year,' says Mr Taher el-Sharif, secretary general of the Egyptian Businessmen's Association. But, as any media watcher knows only too well for the tourism ministry's liking, Egypt's tourism industry this year saw the wrong sort of shooting. A bomb at the pyramids, one outside the Egyptian museum, a tourist shot dead in Upper Egypt, two foreigners killed in a cafe bomb in downtown Cairo and other attacks on tourist targets have devastated business. Estimates vary of the damage done to the industry by the extremist Gama'a al-Islamiyya's campaign - which aims to undermine the government by attacking vital tourist trade earnings. Mr Fouad Sultan, the tourism minister, reckons trade to be a fifth down on last year, when 3m visitors poured in Dollars 3.2bn worth of business. By the end of this year, he says, Egypt may have forfeited Dollars 700m in potential revenues. Others are gloomier, and suggest that business since Christmas has been running at half last year's levels. Some Cairo hotels in March were barely more than a third full. Others had slashed room rates in an increasingly savage price war. Transmed, a private charter airline, says business is down by at least 50 per cent. Egyptair, the national carrier, says trade is 40 per cent lower and has postponed the purchase of three A340 Airbus jets accordingly. This is not the industry's first reverse in recent years. Tourists stayed away in aeroplane loads after the 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking and riots by Cairo security police in 1986. No sooner had the industry recovered from those shocks than the Gulf war stopped the industry dead - individual tourists could have the pyramids to themselves at some points during the war. But this time visitors are being deterred not simply by general fears of the region's instability or volatility, but by a direct campaign against tourist targets. 'The problem is we just don't know when this will stop,' says Mr el-Sharif. 'Unlike the Gulf war, when we knew there would eventually be an end'. In the meantime, the tourism ministry has been working on several fronts to restore in potential holidaymakers' minds the image of Egypt as a safe and sunny idyll of pyramids, pharaonic treasures and feluccas. Mr Sultan has been tireless in attending the world's tourism fairs. He has hired Burson-Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations company, to promote more positive stories about Egypt in the world's press. Saatchi & Saatchi has also been enlisted to promote Egypt's fairer face. Security has been intensified anywhere tourists set foot. Policemen sit in the entrances of popular restaurants, bags are searched at all hotels. Tourist police, troops and helicopters have been deployed in Upper Egypt, where the Gama'a began their campaign last summer by spraying gunfire at tour buses from the cane fields next to the Nileside roads. But finally, the restoration of Egypt's tourism industry will depend most on the success of the violent crackdown by the security forces to eradicate the extremist threat. A considerable amount rides on such success. Many economists in Egypt, not least in international agencies guiding the country's economic reforms, argue tourism to be its greatest hope. Before the present crisis the industry was Egypt's biggest hard currency earner, reaping Dollars 1bn or so more in 1992 than either hydrocarbon exports or Suez Canal toll receipts. Since Mr Sultan became minister in the mid 1980s, the industry has grown by an average 17.5 per cent a year. 'Tourism is the future,' says Mr John Stewart of the International Finance Corporation. 'Oil reserves are finite, the Suez has limited potential and remittances are likely to stay flat. Tourism is the only area where there can be real growth.' Under Mr Sultan's tutelage the private sector has also been allowed rare scope to flourish in the tourism industry. Tourist asset sales will also form much of the advance guard in Egypt's tentative first steps towards privatising its lumbering private sector; hotels and Nile cruisers comprising 8 of the first 20 assets or companies to be sold off this year. 'We are still barely tapping the potential,' says Mr Sultan, who believes the industry could draw an annual 5m visitors within a year or two; 10m - as many visitors as Greece presently accepts - within a decade. Indeed, the scale of present investment in the industry is exceeded only by that of Mr Sultan's ambitions for the sector. In a programme which anticipates the annual number of tourist nights in Egypt to double to 45m from the present 22m within five years, as much as EPounds 10bn has already been committed by the private sector to add new hotel rooms and attendant infrastructure. This will add at least 25,000 rooms to the country's stock of 55,000 by the end of 1994. Fourteen new hotels are being built at the Red Sea resort of Hurgada alone. And it is in resorts like Hurgada, rather than more traditional Egyptian holiday haunts such as Luxor, Aswan or even Cairo itself, that the boom in capacity growth is taking place. Reaching out to attract mass tourism, adding sea, sand and sun appeal to that of its iconic historical past, the government has been handing developers large tracts of coastline to develop in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Sinai. Three mega-projects in these areas could alone see up to Dollars 3bn invested in the next few years. The Sahel Hashish Coast Development Company has won approval for a Dollars 750m scheme to build a tourist village on a stretch of Red Sea coast between Safaga and Hurgada. A consortium of investors led by the Egyptian finance Company, is sinking an initial Dollars 150m into developing from desert a spit of land south of Hurgada into a full tourist complex, with hotels and a golf course, in a project which some of its investors believe could finally reach Dollars 1bn. Dallah al-Baraka and a local Islamic bank are planning, in turn, a Dollars 1bn project to develop a strip of the Mediterranean coast between Alexandria and Mersa Matruh. So far none of these projects has been hurt directly by the recent spate of attacks or the climate of uncertainty they have provoked. Some smaller investors have pulled out of at least one of these projects, but they have been replaced. 'Let's just say what's been happening is not helping,' says one investor, with understatement. And from the government's perspective it is vital that nothing should derail these investments. The reason, as Mr Sultan is abundantly aware, is simple: jobs. 'This is the only industry in the country which is capable of giving the new generation in this country enough jobs,' he says. The minister says that already one in 15 jobs in Egypt depends directly on tourism. After the envisaged expansion, he says it will be one in 10. A great deal, therefore, will rest on the prospects of peaceful months between now and the real start of the Egyptian tourism season in October and November. 'We believe time will prove Egypt is as safe as it was,' says Mr Sultan. But that lies outside his hands.
19930609000000000	FT  09 JUN 93 / Islamic militants bomb bus in Egypt. ISLAMIC extremists killed one man and injured 14 others in a bomb attack on a tourist bus in Cairo yesterday as part of a continuing campaign to cripple the tourist industry, Egypt's biggest source of foreign revenue. The terrorists dropped the bomb from a bridge as the bus travelled through an underpass towards the pyramids at Giza. It exploded on a car, badly damaging the vehicle and the tourist bus which was following. One Egyptian died and 14 other people were injured, including five Britons who were among a party of 39 on a one-day visit to Cairo. The attack was the latest in a year-long campaign waged by extremists primarily against the tourist industry, but which has also targeted government ministers, senior security officials and members of Egypt's Coptic minority. The economy has already felt the impact with some forecasts suggesting a halving of tourism revenues this year. Over 3m tourists visited Egypt last year with earnings estimated at Dollars 3.2bn (Pounds 2.1bn). Some officials had forecast an increase to more than Dollars 4bn during the current year. President Hosni Mubarak has blamed Iran for being behind the violence, which he claims is aimed at destabilising his regime. However, there is also evidence that widespread poverty, particularly in the south and in inner city areas, is proving fertile recruiting ground for groups pledged to the introduction of full Islamic government. The authorities have responded to the attacks by declaring all-out war on the extremists and have used thousands of police and para-military units in assaults on suspected terrorist hideouts. Military courts have sentenced 21 extremists to death in recent months. Religious broadcasting on the state-run media has also been sharply increased in an effort to demonstrate that the regime is more devout than its radical opponents. This has caused growing alarm among more liberal, secular groups in Cairo who say that the government is polarising society and denying greater democratisation which, they argue, is the only effective way of defeating the Islamic extremists. The British Foreign Office is waiting before deciding whether to advise Britons not to visit Egypt in the wake of today's terrorist attack. 'Our consul and vice-consul are visiting the scene of the incident and will be reporting back,' the Foreign Office said. Advice to visitors to Egypt, issued in March this year, was that they should be vigilant at all times, avoid Dairut and Assiut districts unless carrying out essential business, and dress and behave discreetly. While the highest priority was given to protecting visitors, people's safety could not be guaranteed and further incidents in Cairo and elsewhere 'must be expected'. The Association of British Travel Agents said it would continue to tell tourists of the dangers and urge them to be careful. More than 80,000 Britons visit Egypt each year.
19930621000000000	FT  21 JUN 93 / Bombs raise suspicion and fear in Egypt / Analysis of a series of fatal outrages in Cairo. EGYPTIANS this weekend digested with anger, apprehension and confusion the latest in a recent series of apparently random terrorist attacks  - a bomb that on Friday killed seven Egyptians and maimed at least 20 others. It seems to mark a sharp change of tack in the violent anti-government campaign by Islamic extremists. The blast, which resounded across central Cairo like a thunderclap, was the fourth in the capital within a month and brought to 16 dead and 69 injured the number of Egyptian casualties in the latest attacks. The bomb exploded in a main street of the poor north-eastern suburb of Shubra, where it was certain to inflict civilian Egyptian casualties. Like the previous three bombs since May 21, it had been packed with nails to cause serious injury if not death. The attack was immediately condemned by the Moslem Brotherhood, Egypt's main and professedly moderate Islamic grouping, which decried it as an 'ugly crime' in a strongly worded denunciation yesterday. It was met with rage by locals in Shubra, where impromptu demonstrations called on the government to exact bloody revenge on the terrorists. The attack appears to have been a bad own-goal for Islamic militants and a propaganda coup for the government, which had tried to rally equal indignation over attacks on tourist targets and security personnel. These have crippled the country's tourism industry and provoked a sweeping and brutal security crackdown. However, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya, the underground Islamic militant group which has previously claimed responsibility for attacks on police and tourist targets, has stayed silent over the latest bombings. Moreover, in previous claims of responsibility for attacks on tourist buses or sites, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya routinely distanced itself from attacks on individuals  - making an exception for their bloody vendetta-like war against the security forces. The attacks were on 'tourism, not tourists', it said, emphasising its aim to undermine the government by ruining the economy. This raises puzzling questions over the aim, and the perpetrators, of the latest bombings, which include a car blast in a busy street on May 21, killing seven, and an explosion in a central Cairo underpass on May 27 which claimed two Egyptian lives and injured five British tourists in a bus which happened to be passing as the time-bomb was detonated. Senior government officials yesterday, however, were in no doubt that the Gamaa al-Islamiyya was behind the attacks, and claimed that the randomness of these indicated its increasing desperation. 'These people are in retreat, politically speaking,' said Mr Mamdouh Beltagui, state information director. 'They have lost political direction'. This, he said, was the result of the effective decapitation of the Gamaa by a security crackdown in which thousands of suspects have been detained, dozens shot by security forces or tried by military courts, and more than 20 sentenced to death. Western diplomats in Cairo argue that there may be some truth to the government's claims, particularly given the duration, intensity and strength of the security effort against the Gamaa. 'The latest attacks could just be a last-gasp attempt to prove they are still in business,' one said yesterday. But this analysis offers most Egyptians limited reassurance. The latest attacks have been the bloodiest  - and the bombs used among the most sophisticated  - of the extremists' campaign. Each fresh attack, moreover, has defiantly followed fresh rounds of mass detentions of suspected extremists. Just yesterday, police claimed to have found and defused another nail bomb in Assiut. Even the propaganda value of the latest attacks may prove of limited political value to the government, which has generally enjoyed little sympathy, in its battle with the Gamaa, among many Egyptians who see it as increasingly corrupt, unresponsive to their material needs and generally aloof. In a town prone to rumour and conspiracy theory, Cairenes are already wondering whom the latest attacks serve better than the government itself. Mr Abdel-Halim Mandour, a lawyer who has defended Gamaa suspects in recent trials, said yesterday the latest bombings ran counter to the Islamic group's strategy. They were, he concluded, the work of 'foreign or local parties who are hostile to the Islamists', seeking to 'justify the random punishment and death sentences taking place against them'. In the end, there appears, for the moment, to be no other discernible motive for the bombing on Friday and its recent precedents than to heighten a feeling of apprehension and fear in the capital. That, whoever is responsible, has been achieved.
19930709000000000	FT  09 JUL 93 / Seven hanged for terrorism in Egypt: Attacks on tourists and trying to overthrow government. SEVEN Islamic militants were hanged in Egypt yesterday on charges of attacking foreign tourists and seeking to overthrow the government - the greatest number of executions for political crimes in the country's recent history. Five were hanged in 1982 for assassinating President Anwar Sadat. The seven were convicted by a military court in April of six separate bomb and firearm attacks on tourist buses and Nile cruisers late last year, in one of which a young Englishwoman was killed. The men were among 49 tried in the case, including six in absentia, who had proclaimed loyalty to the Gamaa al-Islamiyya extremist group which has claimed responsibility for attacks on tourism and security forces over the past year. A total of 22 individuals have been sentenced to death in trials arising from politically-motivated violence since December last year. President Hosni Mubarak has made a point of publicly ratifying each one to signal his government's resolve to crush the threat from Islamic extremists. Five more men face the scaffold later this month after being convicted in May for their part in four bombings and an attempt on the life of Mr Safwat Sherif, the information minister, who escaped a shooting near his Cairo home with light injuries last April. Two men were hanged in June - the first executions for political crimes in Egypt since 1982 - and the remainder of the 22 sentences were given in absentia. The government's determination to mete out the severest penalties possible on Islamic militants comes despite rising opposition from western and domestic human rights groups both to the use of the death penalty and to the conduct of trials by military courts. President Mubarak shifted authority over such cases to military courts in February to ensure the speediest possible process. Yesterday's executions come a day after publication of Amnesty International's annual report, in which it repeats opposition to use of the death penalty and reiterates allegations of torture, detention without trial and unfair practices in the military courts. Just after yesterday's hangings took place in a Cairo prison, in sequence between 7am and 10am, the Arab Organisation of Human Rights condemned in a press conference the use of military courts, which were 'outside the normal legal framework', said Mr Mohammed Fayek, its secretary general. However, no such opposition is at all likely to deter President Mubarak from ratifying further death sentences which may result from trials due before these courts in the next few weeks. In the biggest of these, a total of 700 alleged members of the Jihad extremist Islamic group are being tried in two concurrent cases, facing charges which include the attempted assassination of public figures and incitement to rebellion. Moreover, the government has still either to apprehend or to bring charges against those responsible for an apparently random series of nail-bombings in Cairo since mid-May which have killed 16 Egyptians.
19930915000000000	FT  15 SEP 93 / Florida cancels tourism campaign after murder. FLORIDA'S state tourism office yesterday cancelled its domestic and international advertising campaigns in the wake of the killing of a British tourist - the ninth foreign visitor to be murdered in the state in the past year. Florida police said Mr Gary Colley, aged 34, was killed and his friend Ms Margaret Jagger wounded when they were attacked in a lay-by near Tallahassee, the state capital, in the early hours. Ms Jagger was later released from hospital. Governor Lawton Chiles announced a Dollars 10,000 (Pounds 6,500) reward for information leading to Mr Colley's killers, and he asked the federal government for help in the effort to crack down on crime. He also announced plans to enlist up to 500 game wardens, agriculture inspectors and marine officers to strengthen patrols on major roads. Mr Colley's death follows the killing last week of Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, a German tourist, in a highway shooting in Miami. Holidaymakers are cancelling trips to Florida because of the attacks. Mr Greg Farmer, the Florida state secretary of commerce, said cancellations at hotels and resorts were running at around 20 per cent after Mr Rakebrand's killing, and the latest attack would probably inflict more damage on the state's Dollars 31bn a year tourism industry. 'It is going to be just catastrophic. This is going to have a very, very negative impact,' Mr Farmer said. Mr Ken Fortune, the county sheriff, said he believed the couple had been chosen at random, and not targeted as foreigners. The British and German governments already issue warnings to tourists about the dangers of travelling in Florida, but travel agents in Europe have generally distinguished Miami from the rest of the state, and advised their customers to pick destinations such as Orlando or St Petersburg. Six of the foreign visitors who have fallen victim to Florida's violence in the past year were attacked in the Miami area, but yesterday's shooting took place in the state's quieter northern panhandle. Tallahassee is a quiet town festooned in Spanish moss, more akin to neighbouring Georgia or Alabama than to the brasher Miami coast. Florida's murder rate of 10.7 per 100,000 population, however, is lower than Georgia's and well below the rate in states such as Louisiana, New York and Texas. Mr Colley and Ms Jagger, from Wilsden, near Bradford, in West Yorkshire, were sleeping in their car in a rest area about 25 miles from Tallahassee when two teenagers approached their car and banged on the windows. The two assailants opened fire when the pair tried to drive away. An attendant at the rest area gave police a description of the attackers. About 40m tourists visit Florida every year, and some 17 per cent are foreigners, including an estimated 800,000 from the UK.
19930916000000000	FT  16 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Florida fears. There was a Florida theme attached to the fortunes of a number of stocks yesterday following the previous day's fallout from the murder of a British tourist in the US state. Rank Organisation chose yesterday to announce a multi-billion dollar extension to its jointly owned Florida theme park. As well as worries that the state's tourism would be badly hit in the long as well as the short term by Tuesday's events, there were also rumblings of the need for a bumper rights issue to fund the venture. Rank slid 21 to 773p in heavy trade of 1.9m. Another casualty was Bass, which owns the Holiday Inn chain. Analysts said the company received sizeable income from its hotels in the Florida region. The stock was also hurt by Allied-Lyons' caution on the pace of US economic recovery - as was Grand Metropolitan, off 13 at 418p. Bass finished 13 down at 479p. Scottish & Newcastle, on the other hand, firmed 3 to 483p on the perceived benefits to its Centre Parcs holiday centres from a decline in visitors to Florida. Hoare Govett was said to be positive on the stock. FT  16 SEP 93 / Florida struggles to limit damage to tourist industry. FLORIDA was yesterday scrambling to limit the damage to its biggest-earning industry, tourism, after the killing of a British holidaymaker on Tuesday. The state government ordered police to guard rest areas off main highways 24 hours a day and to patrol trunk roads. It also set up a free telephone number for tourist safety tips, and asked for Dollars 4m (Pounds 2.5m) of emergency federal aid to pay for police surveillance around Miami. The police search for the killers of Mr Gary Colley, murdered outside Tallahassee in northern Florida, intensified yesterday. Police found the getaway car in Monticello, near Tallahassee. They believe the killers are still in the area and are rounding up teenagers who fit the description. Mr Colley was the ninth foreigner to be killed in the state in the past year, and his murder came less than a week after a German tourist was shot outside Miami airport. Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand and his pregnant wife were driving their rented car when it was hit from behind. The tourists drove on, but assailants opened fire from their car, killing the 33-year-old German. Travellers arriving at Miami airport at night are advised to stay in hotels close by, and those who rent a car and take the road from the airport to Miami Beach are given detailed instructions on how to arrive safely. The Avis rental agency has large signs inside its cars advising drivers not to stop on the way from the airport under any circumstances, especially if bumped from behind. Mr Greg Farmer, state commerce secretary, said about 25 per cent of European package bookings were now being cancelled. 'There is no question that the European market will be affected,' said Mr Mayco Villafana, of the Miami Convention & Visitors Bureau. The Florida tourism industry is worth about Dollars 31bn a year, employs about 650,000 people - 12.4 per cent of the non-farm workforce  - and is the state's largest industry. About 40m tourists visit Florida every year, 17 per cent of them from abroad. Florida has the worst violent crime rates in the US, slightly ahead of New York, though crime rates have recently fallen. Dr John Crotts, an assistant professor at the University of Florida, says an out-of-state visitor has a 91 in a 100,000 chance of becoming a victim of crime - better odds than for Honolulu in the 1980s. Picture, Page 4
19930918000000000	FT  18 SEP 93 / Sun still shines for big bucks tourism: Damian Fraser finds Florida little shaken by murders among holiday-makers. THE MURDER of nine foreign visitors in a year is the stuff of public relations nightmares for every tourist destination. Florida reached that unenviable record on Tuesday, with the killing of the British holiday-maker Mr Gary Colley. It is waiting anxiously for the full impact on its premier industry. Florida is the world's most popular tourist spot, having overtaken California last year. A little more than 41m tourists - about 36m Americans and 7m foreigners - came to the Sunshine State last year, some 2 per cent more than the year before. Tourism is also Florida's largest industry. Tourist spending was Dollars 31bn (Pounds 20.1bn) last year, or 22 per cent of the total in the state. Florida authorities are the first to admit the negative publicity from the killings will have some short-term impact. Mr Greg Farmer, commerce secretary, says the industry might suffer a 15-25 per cent decline this year. Of particular concern is the booming convention business, which received 680,000 delegates last year. 'They look for safety,' says Mr Crotts, 'and the perception is Florida is not safe'. Travel agents expected the biggest impact in the overseas market, the fastest-growing segment of the tourist industry. They spoke of the immediate reduction in bookings from German-speaking countries, and expected the UK tabloid newspaper coverage of the murder of Mr Colley to have its effect on the UK market. With more than 1m tourists to Florida annually, the UK sends the largest number of its citizens to the state after Canada. The immediate problem is not cancellations. These are unlikely just now, given the deposits tourists pay, but the winter season, for which bookings are now being made, is another matter. The overseas tourists will be further put off by the appreciation of the dollar against European currencies. The Association of British Travel Agents (Abta) expects growth of UK tourism to Florida to slow to single digits per cent this year, from 22 per cent growth last year. But the Abta doubts there will be a decline of UK tourism, since most would-be tourists realise that the odds against them being subject to a crime remain long. Local economists likewise doubt the impact of recent murders will be 'catastrophic', as Mr Farmer put it. Florida has enormous advantages - winter sun, beaches, the world's best theme parks in Orlando, and a huge amount of repeat business from Americans with homes or relatives in the state. Florida has established a critical mass of highly competitive tourist services that offer some of the cheapest and best-value accommodation in the world. The state boasts varied attractions. Miami, notwithstanding all its dangers, has become a commercial hub of the Americas, with companies such as AT&T and General Motors setting up regional Latin American headquarters in the city. Orlando brings in mainly US tourists, though Europeans are catching up quickly (growing by 32 per cent last year). Much safer than Miami, Orlando attracts families and increasingly businessmen at conventions. As the state's most important industry, tourism enjoys privileges. Hundreds of murders of locals barely raise an eyebrow in the state but the killing of Mr Colley and, last week, that of the German Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, set off a massive campaign to promote tourist safety, including 24-hour patrols of highway rest areas, plain-clothes police searching for lost tourists, and free telephone advice to tourists. Fear is not yet deterring investors. This week, Universal Studios voted with its cheque book on the future of Florida's tourism industry by announcing an estimated Dollars 3bn expansion in Orlando, including a Jurassic Park theme park, hotels, a convention centre and golf courses.
19930924000000000	FT  24 SEP 93 / Letters to the Editor: Answer to violent crime in US. Sir, As an American expatriate living in Paris, I am often asked: 'Are the United States as dangerous as they seem?' Unfortunately there is no denying the statistics. The recent attention given by the media to violent crime against tourists ('Florida struggles to limit damage to tourist industry', September 16) only highlights events that have been dramatically increasing for years. The measures being implemented by the state of Florida will only temporarily stem the flow; it must be realised that until we elect an administration willing to confront the powers of the National Rifle Association and restrict the rise of handguns, nothing will change in the short term. Loss estimates for Florida's tourist industry are running close to Dollars 1bn. Perhaps this will hit the legislators most effectively - in their pockets. Mark Gerard Nichols, 45 Boulevard Haussmann, 75009 Paris
19931028000000000	FT  28 OCT 93 / Tourism hit by shootings in Cairo. WHATEVER the motives of the lone gunman who shot dead three foreigners as they dined late on Tuesday in the Cairo Semiramis Hotel, those in Egypt's demoralised tourist trade are resigned to the fact that they may not matter a jot. Whether the 28-year-old man arrested over the shooting was an Islamic fundamentalist or mentally disturbed, the effect is the same - to offer further evidence that Egypt is not a safe place for foreign visitors. Mr Andrew Quinlan, the shaken manager of the Semiramis, scarcely needed to tell reporters yesterday morning that he thought the attack would hurt already weak bookings. In the lobby, one Greek tour operator was already pulling his clients out of the hotel, and out of Egypt. 'We've already postponed two trips because of violence,' he said. 'This is enough.' There is no hard evidence that the accused man was part of an 18-month campaign waged by Islamic extremists to undermine the government by attacking targets in the previously flourishing tourist industry. Some witnesses claim he called out Islamic slogans as he fired on the two tables of foreign diners, leaving another three men seriously injured. The slain men, two Americans and a Frenchman, were lawyers attending a conference. Interior ministry officials said the gunman was simply mentally disturbed. But there is little doubt that for whatever motive, he had singled out foreigners in the restaurant, where staff said there was the usual mix of tourists and locals, and that the attack is the gravest against visitors to Egypt in recent years. There is also no doubt that it has dealt a potentially catastrophic blow to the tourist trade, already reeling from the effects of previous attacks. Tourist nights for the first eight months of the year are a third down on last year. Revenue figures from tourism - officially calculated by multiplying tourist nights by an estimated average spend of Dollars 125 per visitor - are barely likely to clear Dollars 2bn this year after a record Dollars 3bn in 1991-92. This in itself is vital, given that tourism vies with Suez canal receipts, oil exports and remittances as the country's main foreign exchange earner. But more worrying is the longer-term effect of the industry's decline. Of those hard currency earners, tourism is the only one that western economists considered capable of significant growth in the next few years. From the mid-1980s to the present, the sector had grown at an average 17.5 per cent a year - far outstripping the economy's average growth of about 6 per cent over the period. More important to an economy with at least 20 per cent unemployment and which needs to add a minimum of 400,000 to 500,000 jobs a year to keep pace with labour force growth, tourism has long been the country's biggest job creator. The tourism ministry and western economists reckon about one in 15 jobs across the economy depends directly on tourism. The job factor is particularly significant in Upper Egypt, both the country's poorest region and that most severely wracked by Islamic extremist violence - two facts most observers in Egypt consider directly related. And it is there, rather than in the newly developed resorts of Sinai and the Red Sea, that the tourist slump is deepest. The Nile cruise business, Upper Egypt's mainstay, is, according to one economist, 'in outright collapse'. Hoteliers and cruise operators have already slashed prices, a trend many worry may lead to an irrevocable drop in standards and facilities. But more important is the effect of the slump on future investment and private sector confidence. The government makes no hard figures available on what proportion of total investment, local and foreign, has been dedicated to tourism recently, but it is commonly accepted to be the most flourishing sector outside the capital-intensive oil industry. 'Tourism has very effectively mobilised savings in the private sector - it is a real symbol of the private sector here. That might now be under threat,' says one economist. Several big tourism investment schemes are under way, particularly in the Red Sea and Sinai where there have been no attacks and where tourist arrivals remain healthy. Last week the International Finance Corporation, the World Bank's private sector arm, approved financing for two local companies in a Dollars 100m project to develop Ras Abu Soma, now a bare spit of the Red Sea coast, into a multi-hotel golfing and diving resort. But investment agencies in Cairo say all the schemes were entered into before the present troubles, and fresh projects have dried up. 'What we have noticed is a very sharp drop in the number of feasibility studies being presented - almost to zero,' says one agency director. In the short term there is little the industry can do but tighten security a notch further, by installing X-ray checks on bags, and hope. The Semiramis was widely regarded as Cairo's safest hotel - it is where US secretaries of state usually stay. In the meantime, the editors of the Egyptian Gazette can only rue yesterday morning's banner headline. 'Egypt safest place on earth,' it read, paraphrasing remarks made in Washington on Tuesday by President Hosni Mubarak. By and large Mr Mubarak is correct. The streets of Egypt's towns are far safer than those of Washington or even parts of London. Attacks against tourists are, as the government never tires of repeating, far fewer and less lethal than in Turkey or Miami. But try telling that to the tour operators.
19940207000000000	FT  07 FEB 94 / Business Travel (Travel Update): Trouble spots. Visitors to Egypt are advised to take special care following new threats of violence by Islamic extremists. Seven foreigners have died and many more been wounded in attacks in Upper Egypt and Cairo. Visitors should avoid the Assiut and Dairut areas and behave and dress discreetly. Street crime is on the increase in Venezuela, particularly in Caracas, Maracay, Valencia and Maracaibo. Travellers should use official taxis, although the metro and buses in Caracas are generally safe. Taxi tickets can be bought in the terminal of Caracas International Airport. Public sector unions in Portugal plan another 24-hour strike on February 11.
19940222000000000	FT  22 FEB 94 / Cairo bankers play down extremist threat. Bankers in Cairo yesterday sought to play down any possible threat from Islamic extremists who have warned that Arab and foreign banks were a target in their anti-government campaign. The extremists had set today as a deadline for people to withdraw money from what they called 'usurious monuments'. A handful of bankers said they had reinforced security, though most said they were content with measures in place for more than a year, since the Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the militant Islamic group, first warned that Arab and foreign businesses might become targets in their campaign. 'There's not much more we can do, and anyway we'd rather not play into the hands of the militants' propaganda,' one foreign banker said. A straw poll of bankers in Cairo found few concerned by the militants' threat and none suggesting they might avoid going in to work. The Gama'a al-Islamiyya issued their deadline earlier this month after planting explosive devices outside three banks in Cairo. A fourth explosive was planted on February 15. Only two of the devices detonated, causing superficial damage and injuring no-one. The banks have been made targets because they charge interest, which is forbidden according to the Islamic Sharia law the militants would like to see strictly installed in Egypt. All but a minority of specialised Islamic institutions charge interest, however, and banks yesterday reported no unusual withdrawals. The militants' warning appears to be an attempt to prove they retain the ability to wage a continued and co-ordinated campaign against the government despite a frequently violent crackdown by security forces. The Gama'a al-Islamiyya's follow-up to its deadline may therefore prove some guide to its present strength, and a test of the government's confident claims to have broken the organisation. Nevertheless, Gama'a claimed responsibility for an attack on Saturday in which four people, including two foreign visitors, were injured, when gunmen opened fire on the Cairo-Luxor train as it passed through a militant stronghold in Upper Egypt. In a statement faxed to news agencies, the Gama'a's standard means of public communication, the group claimed the attack to have been in retribution for three death sentences passed by a military court on three men charged with an attempt late last year on the life of Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak. The three, according to Gama'a, were an army officer and two conscripts charged with mining an airstrip close to the Libyan border at Sidi Barrani shortly before a visit by Mr Mubarak. More than 300 people have fallen victim to the violent campaign between Islamic militants and security forces over the past two years. The militant groups have specifically targeted members of the security forces, high-ranking government officials and the tourism industry, the latter in what has been a largely successful campaign to damage a vital component of Egypt's economy. Last month, Gama'a issued specific warnings to foreigners to leave the country or risk becoming embroiled in what it called its 'ferocious' battle with the government.
19940422000000000	FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (16): The British still come - Violence has damaged earnings from tourism. There is a tent encampment just outside Aswan, where soldiers from Cairo do seven-day stints guarding the city against the fundamentalist Gama'a Islamiyya. Its members have targeted Egypt's Dollars 3bn tourism industry which, since 1988, has outstripped oil as the country's main source of foreign exchange. A little further down the airport road is the construction site of a tourism catering school. Given the effect of the militants' campaign, which has reduced arrivals from 3.2m in 1992 to 2.5m last year and income down from Dollars 2.1bn to Dollars 1.3bn in the same period, one might wonder why they bother with the catering school. Both the tent encampment and the construction site represent elements of the government's campaign to crush the activists and revive an industry which employs, directly or indirectly, 5m of Egypt's 61m population and is seen as the simplest route to creating further employment quickly. Mr Mamdouh Beltagui, the tourism minister, believes that the international reaction to the deaths of at least three tourists, a bomb at the pyramids, another outside the Egyptian museum in Cairo and attacks on cruise ships and tourist buses in Upper Egypt, has been overdone - particularly by the western press - to devastating effect. Occupancy rates in Cairo are just 53.5 per cent at best. In Aswan, whose economy is 60 per cent reliant on tourism, the rates this year are just 35 per cent. Luxor, which is almost 100 per cent reliant on the industry via tours of the Valley of the Kings, Tutankhamen's tomb and the Karnak and Luxor temples, is empty and tense with only 38 per cent occupancy . . . and that only with discounts of up to 50 per cent on hotel rooms. Rates at Hurghada and Sharm el Sheikh, the new Red Sea/Sinai resorts which cater for the sun, sea and sand market, are doing rather better: they are up to 55 per cent so far this year, against a 1993 average of 27 per cent and 43 per cent respectively . There is little physical or political cover for the militants in the desert, so it is no surprise that the resorts escaped the militants' campaign. Moreover, tour operators have been successful in marketing Sinai as a distinct destination, breaking any association between these resorts and the rest of Egypt. But it is less clear why Luxor, predominantly reliant on cruise ships which now rarely ply the Nile from Cairo via Assiut, has been spared . Apart from the government's ferocious clampdown on the fundamentalists - thousands have been rounded up and many lives have been lost among the police and suspects - one explanation is that any terrorist would be torn limb from limb if he was caught in the town by local business people who depend on the daily flows of visiting cruise passengers. Egypt's archaeological heritage, contained primarily in Luxor, Cairo, Aswan and Abu Simbal, is where its long-term future lies. 'People only come to Egypt because it's an ancient civilisation,' says Mr Adel Akladios, general manager for American Express which has a large tourism business in Cairo. For the moment, 'It has become a delay destination, but not a cancellation decision.' This is nothing new. Egypt became a serious 'delay' destination after the 1985 Achille Lauro hi-jacking and riots by Cairo security police in 1986. The industry had barely recovered when it was hit by the Gulf War. 'It will take another one or two years before things are under control,' says Mr Akladios. 'Someone gets killed in Washington every five minutes but that doesn't get talked about. Tourists are targets in other countries. But Europeans have a gut fear of Islamic fundamentalism. If it's Islamic they think it's bloodthirsty. It's something they just don't understand.' He believes visitors will get used to the idea that 'Egypt is no longer 100 per cent safe. They will know that all they have to do is avoid places like Assiut,' the poverty stricken town which has long been the fundamentalists' stronghold . Mr Akladios says the British have been the most sanguine and have continued to come in large numbers. 'They are used to living with the IRA.' The biggest drop has been among high-spending Americans, together with Scandinavians, the French, the Germans, Italians and Spaniards. Gulf tourism, which accounts for 45 per cent of the market, has been largely maintained. Egypt has embarked on an aggressive marketing campaign - having never in the past felt the need to advertise its obvious treasures. Burson Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations company, has been hired. Saatchi and Saatchi has also been taken on. A budget of Dollars 42m a year has been approved for advertising and Mr Beltagui, who took over from Mr Fouad Sultan last October and has considerable political clout, appears frequently on the world's television screens. The success of this campaign is seen as crucial, not just to the fortunes of hoteliers and cruise ship operators, but to the general economy. One in 15 jobs already depends on tourism and it is seen as the best hope for creating many more.
19940802000000000	FT  02 AUG 94 / Tourists return to more peaceful Egypt. Three months free of Islamic militant attacks on tourist targets has encouraged a recovery in Egypt's tourist industry, with Cairo hotels enjoying their highest occupancy rates in more than two years. Latest tourism ministry figures show a 4.5 per cent rise in visitors in May against the same month last year, the first overall rise since militant groups began attacks on tourist buses, cruise boats and other tourist targets in late 1992. Hoteliers say the recovery has strengthened since then. The last attacks against tourist targets came in March, when a few trains were raked with gunfire as they passed through Assiut, a heartland of militant activity in southern Egypt. A German tourist died from injuries after gunmen fired at a Nile cruiser passing by Assiut. Since April the government has repeatedly claimed its crackdown has succeeded in breaking the main militant groups, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya and Jihad, and prevented them operating outside their traditional strongholds in Upper Egypt. Mr Hassan al-Alfie, interior minister, said last week: 'We have managed to encircle them and put an end to the acts of violence.' Mr Tony Baldry, parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office, said during a recent visit to Egypt that he had 'every impression this was a situation which has been contained, understood, and dealt with'. The lull in violence has encouraged tourism in Cairo, where five-star hotels report occupancy rates of between 85-90 per cent against an average of little over 50 per cent this time last year. 'There's been an extraordinarily good improvement,' said Mr Richard Bousfield, marketing director at the Cairo Semiramis Intercontinental. The bulk of Cairo's summer visitors are Gulf Arabs. Hoteliers and tour operators in Europe say it remains too early to forecast whether European, American and other tourists will return in large numbers during the winter season, which begins in October. However, some hotels say provisional tour bookings for next season are already twice what they were a year ago. 'Bookings are looking good; they're up for August and early September, and I sense already that European tour operators are beginning to respond,' said Mr Armin Shrocker, manager of the Nile Hilton hotel. Egypt attracted a record 3.2m tourists in 1991-92 before the militant attacks, garnering hard-currency earnings calculated by the government at about Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn). It says the anti-tourism violence, designed by the Gamaa al-Islamiyya militant group to attack the government by harming the economy, cost Dollars 900m in lost revenues last year, hitting employment and investment in what had been Egypt's fastest-growing industry. However, diplomats and other commentators are cautious about forecasting an end to militant violence. Moreover, the Egyptian government faces a considerable security test in early September, when Cairo will attract around 20,000 participants, including prime ministers, to the United Nations International Conference on Population and Development. On Sunday the Gamaa al-Islamiyya broke a silence of more than two and a half months by issuing a faxed statement declaring it intended to step up violence in the Upper Egyptian town of Mallawi, 270km south of Cairo, where it claimed its members had ambushed and wounded two policemen.
19940901000000000	FT  01 SEP 94 / Fears of violence stalk Cairo conference: Population delegates are putting themselves in danger's way, militants warn. The glee with which the Egyptian government originally greeted the UN's selection of Cairo as host to next week's International Conference on Population and Development looks increasingly tinged with apprehension, as the hordes of delegates, journalists and assorted experts start to arrive. After two years' hitting the headlines for Islamic militant violence, publicity which devastated its glittering tourism industry, Egypt was able to point proudly to the conference as evidence of the highest confidence in its control of domestic security. The prestige of the gathering was also taken as acknowledgment of Egypt's central role in the Middle East and Moslem world. But as Monday's official opening of the conference nears, its hosts have reason to feel anxious. Not only has the violent and militant Gamaa al-Islamiyya re-emerged after several months' relative silence to warn visitors that they 'are putting themselves in danger's way' by attending, but the debate about the conference's agenda has suddenly reared into an awkward religious battle which seems to have caused one of Egypt's staunchest regional allies, Saudi Arabia, to boycott the affair altogether. It has put Cairo firmly on the defensive in its domestic political tussle with Islamic conservatives. The government has bent every bone to assure the greatest possible security for the conference, which will attract 15,000 delegates, with an assortment of prime ministers, vice-presidents and celebrities. The capital's main routes are dotted with white-uniformed police, and parking has been banned around the main hotels, which resemble minor military encampments. Until a week ago, the Cairo government could claim with some confidence that it had won the upper hand in its assault on violent Islamic extremists. Although violence continued in militant hotbeds around Assiut in Upper Egypt, Gamaa al-Islamiyya had failed to pull off attacks on tourist targets for almost five months, its flow of faxed warnings had abated and the capital had for months been free of even minor incidents. But last Friday, Gamaa re-surfaced to claim credit for an attack on a group of Spanish tourists in Upper Egypt in which a young Spaniard was killed. Last weekend it condemned what it called the 'conference on licentiousness' and made its warning to attending delegates. The result has been to remind the government, and all those attending the conference, that however successful the government has been in constraining militant violence, it has failed to eliminate it. Few diplomats or other observers in Cairo would therefore pronounce with any confidence that the next 10 days will pass without a single incident. 'It is an enormous test,' says a western diplomat. 'The militants will know that the smallest incident over the next few days will get them big headlines.' But the headlines surrounding the conference to date have already been discomfiting enough for the government. That the conference's proposed final text has become the focus of a furious battle between Roman Catholic and Moslem conservatives and the majority of the other 170 states represented at the meeting, who have been working on the draft for some two years, is embarrassing enough. It has already led to the boycotts by Saudi Arabia and Sudan, and is likely to have been a factor in the decisions of Turkey's Premier Tancu Ciller and Ms Begum Khaleda Zia, Bangladesh's prime minister, not to attend. Worse, for the government, however, is the ammunition the row over the draft text has handed Egypt's religious conservatives, particularly the Moslem Brotherhood, to which President Hosni Mubarak's regime vehemently denies status as a political party. The regime has done all it can in recent months to counter the Brotherhood's increasingly successful infiltration of powerful professional associations, such as the lawyers' and doctors' syndicates. The government is suspicious of the Brotherhood's position in relation to extremist and violent militant groups, despite the Brotherhood's constant assertion of its moderation. It recently excluded the Brotherhood from a national political dialogue, saying it did not exist as a political group. It has done all it can to try to diminish the Brotherhood's religious and political authority, in favour of its own state-sanctioned Islamic voice, which has traditionally issued from the Al-Azhar University mosque, one of Islam's oldest seats of instruction. But the Al-Azhar earlier this month handed the government an unpleasant surprise by condemning the conference as un-Islamic. It accused the draft text of condoning homosexuality, abortion and pre-marital and adolescent sex. The Brotherhood promptly agreed with the condemnation, branding the conference an imperialist attempt by the west to curb population growth in the Moslem world. That the row over the draft text has handed the Brotherhood a powerful political platform is clear from the fact that the government has been forced to reply, defensively, that it could not condone anything in the final document which ran contrary to Sharia, or Islamic, law. 'The government cannot oppose the Brotherhood,' says Mr Essam al-Arian, a doctor and Brotherhood spokesman, 'because society feels we are moderate and active. They have no choice but to have full dialogue with us.' The full political consequence of this row for the government, and the implications for its own population policies will take much longer than the conference to shake out. Leaders of the Brotherhood have their eyes firmly on next year's party elections, which they are likely to contest in informal alliance with the Labour Party. Meanwhile, the conference hosts can only hope at least for another incident-free fortnight in Cairo, one which might help to restore the city's currently fully booked hotels to their former profitability.
19940929000000000	FT  29 SEP 94 / Egypt security crackdown. Egyptian security forces yesterday rounded up more than 30 suspected Islamic militants in Hurghada, 500km south of Cairo, following an attack by two gunmen late on Tuesday in which a German tourist and two Egyptians were shot dead. A second German shot in the attack was said yesterday to be 'stable' after a bullet was removed from his stomach. Witnesses said two men drew up in a lorry, then opened fire with automatic weapons on a group of tourists in Hurghada's market, before fleeing into an adjacent residential area. The attack has raised fears of a renewed campaign by Islamic militants against tourist targets following a five-month lull - the result largely of a tough and concerted security operation which the Egyptian government claimed had broken the back of militant Islamic groups. Egypt's Red Sea resorts until now have been free of incidents throughout the Gamaa al-Islamiyya's two-year-old campaign to put pressure on the government by ruining the tourism industry. The attack comes at a damaging time for tourism, which had begun a revival, aided by the peaceful passage in Cairo of the recent International Conference on Population and Development.
