10000000000000000	Argentine British relations post Falkland War How have relations between Argentina and Great Britain developed the 1982 war over the Falkland Islands   Have diplomatic  economic  and military relations been restored   Do differences remain over the status of the Falkland Islands.
19890802000000000	THE WORLD; ARGENTINE-BRITISH TRADE. Argentina announced that it has decided to lift financial and trade restrictions on imports from Britain that were imposed during the 1982 Falkland Islands War. "As of this date, trade between the two nations will be given the same general treatment as trade between any other two nations," a statement from the Foreign Ministry said. The decision removed a major stumbling block toward re-establishing diplomatic relations between the nations, broken during the conflict over the islands. Britain had informed the recently inaugurated government of President Carlos Saul Menem that it welcomed concrete steps in the area of trade to reflect good faith in an eventual restoration of diplomatic relations. Britain ended its trade curbs on Argentina in 1985.
19900216000000000	ARGENTINA, BRITAIN HEAL RIFT CAUSED BY FALKLANDS WAR. Argentina and Britain announced an agreement Thursday to restore full diplomatic ties, nearly eight years after they fought a 74-day war over the Falkland Islands, a sparsely populated archipelago off Argentina's coast in the South Atlantic Ocean. The announcement capped two days of talks here between Argentine and British officials. Britain agreed to lift by March 31 a 150-mile military protection zone enforced around the islands since Argentina invaded them in 1982. The pact calls for advance notice by each side of military exercises around the islands, which are home to about 1,900 people. In the war over the islands, called the Malvinas by Argentina, 712 Argentines, 255 Britons and three islanders died. London and Buenos Aires broke diplomatic relations during the conflict. The agreement announced Thursday stipulated that talks will continue between the two nations on fishing around the islands -- an important source of revenue -- and that the International Red Cross will work out visits by Argentines to war cemeteries in the Falklands. By mutual consent, the latest talks did not touch on claims to sovereignty over the Falklands, which Argentina and Britain have disputed since 1833.
19910426000000000	FT  26 APR 91 / Argentina seeks UK help on privatisation. ARGENTINA is seeking UK expertise to help with the next stages of its ambitious privatisation programme. Mr Guido di Tella, Argentine foreign minister, met representatives of British companies and financial institutions, including Baring Brothers, the merchant bank, and ICI, in London yesterday, to discuss the privatisation programme and encourage UK investment in Argentina. 'We are very interested in the British experience of privatisation,' he said in an interview with the Financial Times. 'Britain has great expertise in this matter, particularly in the creation of regulatory mechanisms to monitor companies after privatisation.' The first phase of Argentine privatisation was criticised for its haste and dogged by rumours of corruption. The gas, water and electricity industries, including SEGBA, the greater-Buenos Aires area electricity company, are next in line, and Argentina is eager to ensure adequate regulatory frameworks and maximise competition. Mr di Tella, who met Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, on Wednesday, was optimistic on relations with Britain. 'We have a specific problem with the (Falkland) Islands and the fisheries issue, but commercial relations are excellent.' Trade with the UK was growing very quickly, he said. 'Exports from the UK to Argentina, which had been lagging, have been picking up.' Trade between the two countries had recovered only slowly after the 1982 Falklands conflict. However, after Britain and Argentina established full diplomatic relations last July, Argentine exports grew quickly to a monthly average of about Dollars 20m (Pounds 11.7m) by the end of last year, against only Dollars 3m previously. UK exports stood at about Dollars 13m a month. Mr di Tella was adamant that Argentina would not relinquish its claim to sovereignty over the Falklands. 'We think we have right on our side. We think we will eventually convince the British government and the islanders to accept a different sort of settlement. However, we are aware of the peculiarities of the islands and their history and this is something we want to respect. We are willing to discuss all sorts of arrangements with the islanders that would be more congenial.' Guido di Tella, 'Interested in British experience'
19920122000000000	FT  22 JAN 92 / UK rebuffs Argentine military overtures. DISCREET attempts by Argentina to resume normal military ties with the UK appear to have been rebuffed in the run-up to the 10th anniversary of the Falklands war. It emerged yesterday that the Ministry of Defence has turned down a request from Argentina to allow a limited supply of UK-manufactured spare parts to the Argentine navy, begun during the Gulf war, to continue. Whitehall has also vetoed a plan for an Argentine military transport aircraft to fly to Britain next month to collect some cargo assembled by the naval attache's office at the Argentine embassy in London. Argentine officials insist the cargo would have involved nothing more than a few boxes filled with books and military research periodicals, as well as brochures of British defence companies, normally sent via the diplomatic bag. But the planned trip by an aircraft which is normally used by the Argentine navy to transport military equipment would have almost certainly fuelled stiff opposition from the Falkland islanders and from MPs opposed to any suggestion of a 'sell-out' over the islands. Military ties between the two countries have been governed officially by an arms embargo imposed by Britain on Argentina following the outbreak of the Falklands war in 1982. During the Gulf war, however, London agreed to the supply of Rolls-Royce spare parts to the Argentine navy which operated with the allied forces. The parts were for Argentina's German-built destroyer Almirante Brown, which is powered by Rolls-Royce Olympus and Tyne gas turbines. They were drawn from Royal Navy stocks. Argentine officials had hoped the waiving of the arms embargo would pave the way for a more open policy on military relations. The Argentine navy is believed to be cutting the operational hours of vessels to minimise the use of equipment for which replacement parts are needed.
19920218000000000	FT  18 FEB 92 / World News In Brief: Falklands talks. A first round of Anglo-Argentine talks on seismic exploration around the disputed Falkland Islands will take place in Buenos Aires later this month.
19920227000000000	FT  27 FEB 92 / UK and Argentina open talks on Falklands' oil. BRITAIN and Argentina yesterday began discussions in Buenos Aires on developing oil resources in the South Atlantic, writes John Barham from Buenos Aires. The talks, expected to last two to three days, are the first formal negotiations on the most challenging and complex issue facing the two sides, apart from the central question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. It has long been rumoured that the seabed around the islands holds large oil reserves. However, there has been no exploration in the region since an inconclusive survey in the 1970s. Last year, London authorised the local Falkland Islands government to issue seismic exploration licences, bringing the fraught issue of oil resources to the fore. If oil is found in commercial quantities around the islands, co-operation with Argentina would be essential to develop the reserves. Major gasfields have been found in Argentine waters between Tierra de Fuego and the Falklands, but, so far, little oil has been found. Although both sides will use this week's talks to set out their points of view, issues such as harmonisation of legislation, law enforcement, taxation, environmental policies and the demarcation of zones are yet to be addressed. Inevitably, they will touch either directly or indirectly on the sensitive issue of sovereignty. The islands' councillors have yet to pass any oil legislation. Their laws will depend on the outcome of the talks with Buenos Aires. However, Argentina does not recognise the Falklands' local government.
19921028000000000	FT  28 OCT 92 / Argentina expects Hurd visit. MR Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, is to visit Argentina early next year, his Argentine counterpart Mr Guido di Tella said yesterday, writes John Barham in Buenos Aires. Mr Di Tella said no date had been agreed for the visit but he expected it would take place in January. Preparations for a visit to Britain by President Carlos Menem and bilateral issues - notably the Falkland islands - are likely to head the two ministers' agenda. However, British officials fear a visit by Mr Menem would add to Prime Minister John Major's political headaches. The government could face criticism from within Conservative ranks if it was seen to be making concessions over the Falklands.
19921217000000000	FT  17 DEC 92 / British Gas wins Argentine deal. A CONSORTIUM led by British Gas yesterday bought the largest gas distribution company in Argentina in a privatisation auction in Buenos Aires yesterday with a bid of just over Dollars 300m (Pounds 197m). The bid for Distribuidora de Gas Metropolitana, which supplies 1.7m consumers in Buenos Aires, values the company at just over Dollars 700m. British Gas, which holds a leading 41 per cent stake in the consortium, will take over management of the company by the month-end, installing Mr Rob Varrion, a former regional operations director in Britain, as general manager. Mr Peter Lehmann, director of British Gas's global gas division, said the price 'was very reasonable for us and very fair for the government'. The consortium, which includes the Argentine conglomerate Perez Companc, will own 70 per cent of Metropolitana and is taking over its debts. A majority of the rest will be sold to the public next year, with the remainder held by employees. The other gas distribution company in Buenos Aires, Gas de Buenos Aires Norte, supplying 850,000 consumers, was sold yesterday to Gas Natural, a subsidiary of Spain's Repsol, for Dollars 155m. The third-round auctions for the two companies complete the privatisation of the state monopoly, Gas del Estado, split into eight distribution and two transportation companies for sale. The sale valued the industry's assets at more than Dollars 4bn, nearly double the minimum price. Mr Charles Alexander, a director of NM Rothschild, adviser on the project, said the privatisation had secured a 'very broad spread of investors in the Argentine gas industry', with operators from Britain, Belgium, Spain, Italy, Chile, the US and Canada all emerging as winners. The acquisition will double the size of British Gas's global gas division from where it hopes to make 20 per cent of its profits by the end of the decade. Further investment in Metropolitana - which covers 21 per cent of the country's population and which supplied 4.8bn cubic metres of gas in 1991 - would be financed out of its turnover, British Gas has said. It is committed to invest Dollars 103.7m over the next five years in the company. Insurer's issue cleared, Page 25
19921231000000000	FT  31 DEC 92 / Hurd to visit Argentina. UK foreign secretary Douglas Hurd will meet President Carlos Menem in Argentina next week, the first senior British official to visit since the Falklands war 10 years ago, Reuter reports.
19930106000000000	FT  06 JAN 93 / Flying into flak over fish and Falklands: UK cabinet minister makes first trip to Argentina since 1982. WHEN Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd arrives in Buenos Aires this morning, the first UK cabinet minister to visit Argentina since the 1982 Falkland Islands conflict, he will fly into a barrage of inflated expectations. The Falklands may have become a peripheral issue in Britain, but Argentina remains obsessed with the islands and clearly hopes that Mr Hurd's five-day visit will signify another step on the tortuous road to 'recovering' the islands, this time through diplomatic means. The British have publicly disabused their hosts of any belief that the Falklands is up for negotiation. Mr Hurd told Argentina's La Nacion newspaper at the weekend: 'I do not expect, and neither should you, that my visit will set in motion any great advances.' Instead, he said, his visit would be devoted to further consolidating Britain's improving links with Argentina. Britain and Argentina re-established diplomatic relations in 1990, a year after President Carlos Menem took office. Since then relations have improved steadily to the point where they co-operated militarily during the 1991 Gulf war. Britain is assigning greater importance to its relations with Latin America, and Mr Menem's free market and pro-western policies have made Argentina an increasingly visible reference point in the region. The economy has settled down to rapid growth and its privatisation policies have involved British banks, consultancy firms and industrial companies, the most notable being British Gas's leading position in the consortium which took control of the Buenos Aires gas distribution company last month. Argentina has also opened up its secretive atomic establishment and scrapped its Condor II missile project. Britain and the US viewed both projects with great suspicion as a source of proliferation. At the same time Argentina has sent troops as UN peacekeepers to the Gulf and Yugoslavia, for reasons of prestige and to keep its habitually restive troops busy. That still leaves the awkward question of the Falklands. Buenos Aires continues to press a claim to the islands, despite the humiliating defeat of 1982. Equally, Britain refuses to discuss sovereignty formulas. Both have agreed to disagree over sovereignty, but cannot agree on how to manage shared resources, especially oil and fisheries. There have been some advances. Seismic tests for oil will be carried out in Falklands waters this year by two companies. The two sides have also worked out a fisheries conservation agreement for 1993, and are now working on a more permanent arrangement. UK and Argentine scientists have started joint research on fish conservation. Curiously, the illex squid, prized by gourmets in the Far East, is the centre of a dispute which islanders see as a continuation of the 1982 conflict by other means. The islands have become one of the richest spots on earth by selling licences to Far Eastern squid-fishing fleets. But in December, Argentina announced it would start issuing cut-price licences of its own, breaking the Falklands' monopoly. The move is expected in Port Stanley to deprive the islands of half or more of the Pounds 30m a year in revenues from licence sales. Some two-third of the islands' revenues come from licensing. Provided the Argentine decision has a commercial, rather than predatory, motivation, the British government is virtually powerless to influence the move. However, Mr Hurd has warned that attempts to use squid licences as 'political toys' could threaten wider bilateral relations. Mr Hurd, who travels on to Chile, will be pressed to invite Mr Menem on an official visit to London. Mr Menem himself first asked to be invited to the UK over a year ago. But there is little sign that an invitation will be forthcoming.
19930108000000000	FT  08 JAN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Falklands squid fears cloud Hurd's Argentine visit. THE ACRIMONIOUS dispute over fishing around the Falkland Islands loomed large as Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, made a five-day visit to Argentina this week, the first by a senior UK politician since the Falklands war. Despite defeat in the 1982 conflict, Argentina never surrendered its claim to the islands. Today, it is continuing the struggle by economic warfare, rather than by force of arms. Just before Christmas, after fishing talks with Britain, Argentina said it would start selling fishing licences of its own, breaking the islands' lucrative fishing monopoly. The Falklands began issuing licences in 1987, mainly to squid-fishing ships from Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. After knowing only hardship and austerity, the islanders were soon taking in more than Pounds 20m a year in licence fees, making them some of the wealthiest people on earth. The illex squid, prized by gourmets in the Far East, is the South Atlantic's most lucrative species. Already, Argentina has attracted most of the Falklands' best customers by offering 45 cut-price, three-year licences, valid for an extended fishing season. Mr John Barton, the Falklands' director of fisheries, says that 'the impact is pretty dramatic'. Last year, he sold between 140 and 150 licences, half of them to Japanese vessels. Argentina has however sold all its licences to Japanese ships that used to fish in Falklands waters. The islanders always knew that Argentina would eventually break their monopoly. The only surprise was the time it took. For years after the war, Argentina would not even negotiate with Britain. As it was, nationalistic laws banned foreigners from fishing in its waters, even though the small local industry showed little interest in the South Atlantic. All this changed with the resumption of diplomatic relations in 1990. Argentina recognised the Falklands' fishery conservation zones and the two sides started swapping data and controlling illegal fishing. Last October, Argentina changed its laws to allow foreign ships into its waters, as required under a USDollars 1bn five-year fishing agreement with the European Community. From there, it was only a short step to selling squid licences, which had the attraction of depriving the islands of revenue while increasing Argentina's. Mr Guido di Tella, Argentina's Foreign Minister, says: 'The bonanza is over. The islanders can look back to the past wistfully, but the future will be different'. He says Argentina will press its rights to the full in future negotiations about a medium and long term fishery arrangement. If the talks become deadlocked, he will appeal to international arbitration, which he says will favour Argentina. Mr Barton fears Argentina could allow over-fishing in its waters to cut the islands' income instead of co-operating to conserve the illex. 'I am not terribly optimistic,' he says. 'If everyone was working on a conservation basis, it would be relatively straightforward to ensure long-term sustainability.' He says that Argentina's political stance makes 'it very difficult to see eye to eye on very simple things'. Mr Hurd underlined the Falklanders fears this week and warned Argentina against using the illex as a 'political toy'. British officials doubt, moreover, that Argentina can police its waters or monitor fish stocks adequately. The illex has a one-year life cycle, so overfishing could wipe it out forever. Mr Barton says the Falklands have an outstanding record on conservation. He has restricted licence sales to prevent overfishing - and to avoid glutting the squid market, which would eventually lower the Falklands' licence revenues. He even hints that a 'squid war' could be in the offing. 'We will have to look at how to make things more attractive for ships to fish in the Falklands,' he says. 'But we see no long term winners. If we take the moral high ground, Argentina could devastate the resource and we would not even see any revenue.' Argentine diplomats dismiss the Falklands' conservation policies. One official accused them of 'depredation' and presenting 'data that is just not serious'. He said Argentina was only taking its fair share of a common resource. The claims and counter-claims are part of the cut and thrust of negotiations and the Argentines are bound to use the squid dispute to press for compromises on issues such as oil exploration. Argentina's ultimate objective is to negotiate the islands' sovereignty - which London refuses even to discuss. Argentina says it wants to 'recover' the Falklands by winning over the islanders' hearts and minds. Distrust of the Argentines runs deep, and Argentina's squid strategy will do nothing to persuade the islanders of its good intentions.
19930111000000000	FT  11 JAN 93 / Chile to brief Hurd on Moyle death. BRITISH Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, who arrived yesterday from Argentina on a two-day visit to Chile, is to discuss with Chilean officials the unsolved murder of Mr Jonathan Moyle, a British defence journalist killed in Santiago three years ago. Mr Hurd was expected to be briefed by the Chilean Foreign Ministry on the slow progress of the murder inquiry. So far, the inquiry has failed to shed any light on the assassination, which was made to look like suicide. Mr Moyle, the 28-year-old editor of Defence Helicopter World, was murdered in the Carrera Hotel in Santiago in March 1990 while covering an airshow. British interest in Mr Moyle's fate was revived following the collapse of the Matrix Churchill trial, where it was shown that UK government ministers sanctioned the sale of military technology to Iraq via a Chilean middle-man, Mr Carlos Cardoen. Attempts to link Mr Cardoen to Moyle's assassination collapsed last week during an identification parade in which a Carrera Hotel chambermaid failed to recognise a Cardoen employee she thought she had seen talking to Mr Moyle on the eve of his death. Mr Cardoen has always denied any link to the murder. Mr Hurd's two-day visit to Chile is also expected to be taken up with trade and investment talks, and the impact of the European Community single market on Chilean exports. The UK is Chile's biggest export market in Europe, with sales of some Pounds 200m last year, against imports of some Pounds 110m. British multinationals also have a strong presence in the Chilean mining, cement, tobacco and food industries, with Pounds 2bn of investments, but British diplomats in Santiago believe UK exporters are not taking full advantage of Chile's booming economy, which grew 9.7 per cent last year. Mr Hurd's five-day visit to Argentina was described by both sides as a success, even though they made no progress over the Falklands, the only issue that divides them. Mr Hurd said his trip proved 'that it is possible to come to Argentina and not be bombarded all the time by the sovereignty dispute'. British officials were pleasantly surprised that demonstrators did not meet them on their arrival in Buenos Aires on Wednesday. One of Argentina's top Falkland negotiators said Mr Hurd's visit, the first by a cabinet minister since the 1982 Falklands conflict, meant 'we are on our way to a broader, richer relationship in which the islands are only a part of the relationship, not the only issue'.
19930401000000000	FT  01 APR 93 / World News in Brief: Argentine ministers welcome. Britain is to invite Argentina's economy and foreign ministers to London later this year in the first official visit to Britain by Argentine ministers since the Falklands war in 1982.
19930403000000000	FT  03 APR 93 / British Gas in Argentine oil talks. BRITISH Gas and YPF, Argentina's state-owned oil company, are negotiating the possibility of jointly exploring and developing offshore gas and oilfields bordering the Falkland islands' territorial waters. A British Gas executive yesterday confirmed that 'we have been discussing with YPF a number of possible joint ventures. There is an offering in the South Atlantic and we have discussed the possibility of joining up with YPF, but there is nothing formal yet.' The government plans to sell rights to six blocks in Argentine waters adjacent to Falkland waters. A tender was scheduled for last Wednesday, but YPF requested it be postponed for 90 days after British Gas had asked for more time to analyse technical data. A government official said no other companies were interested in the region because of the dispute with Britain over the Falkland islands. None the less, two companies are carrying out seismic exploration surveys off the Falklands under licences issued by the islands. Buenos Aires is anxious to increase British trade and investment, which it hopes would allay the Falklands' suspicion of Argentina and create commercial ties with Britain that would offset the vociferous pro-Falkland lobby in London. British Gas already produces oil in Argentina and last December bought a 29 per cent share in the privatised Buenos Aires gas distribution company. UK plans to invite Argentine ministers to Britain later this year have been welcomed in Buenos Aires.
19930527000000000	FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (8): Diplomatic talks go on - The Falkland Islands. ARGENTINA is obsessed with the Falkland Islands. Eleven years after its defeat in the 74-day conflict with Britain, the country's overriding foreign policy aim is winning sovereignty over the islands. In every important speech, President Carlos Menem makes a ritual reference to Argentina's sovereignty over the Falklands. He claims his policy of rapprochement - rather than confrontation - with Britain will enable Argentina to 'recover' sovereignty over the islands by 2000. Mr Menem said: 'We will continue talking. In the world of diplomacy one needs great patience. There is no possibility of taking this conflict over the Falklands to a situation similar to 1982.' His aim is to draw the UK into as close a relationship as possible. Stronger trade and investment links with Argentina would gradually reduce the importance of the Falklands to Britain. Eventually, London will have sufficient confidence in Argentina to consider transferring sovereignty. Several British companies already operate privatised utilities in Argentina. But instead of receding, the Falklands question remains an open sore in bilateral relations. Argentina continually presses for greater involvement in developing the natural resources. In 1991 the UK agreed to co-operate to conserve fisheries. Last year Argentina began to issue fishing licences, muscling in on the main source of revenue. Ordinary Argentines are frustrated that Mr Menem's policy has still not led to any talks over the crucial issue of sovereignty. London has remained unyielding in its insistence that co-operation with Argentina does not imply any recognition of its claim to the islands. The UK foreign office says this policy will change only if and when the islands' fewer than 2,000 inhabitants agree to a change in their status. Last month, Argentina suffered another diplomatic slap in the face when Britain announced it would extend territorial waters to 200 miles around the remote and uninhabited South Georgia and South Sandwich island groups, which Argentina also claims. Oil is emerging as another source of friction. The Falklands are believed to have big oil and gas deposits and Argentina wants to tie Britain into a joint oil regime. London has ignored Argentina's arguments, and last year licensed two companies to carry out seismic exploration in two blocks around the islands. Britain refuses to discuss oil co-operation until studies confirm the region does have hydrocarbon reserves in commercial quantities. There is scant chance of a shift in the islanders' virulently anti-Argentine attitudes. Memories of Argentina's three-month military occupation remain fresh. And Britain has still not lifted its arms embargo on Argentina. London has also successfully persuaded Washington not to sell two squadrons of ageing Skyhawk fighter bombers to Argentina. However, talks are planned later this year to resume training courses for Argentine officers at British military academies.
19930529000000000	FT  29 MAY 93 / Menem calls for Falklands inquiry. ARGENTINE President Carlos Menem has ordered an 'immediate' investigation into war crimes allegedly committed by British troops during the 1982 Falklands War. His announcement follows fresh allegations of atrocities made this week in the UK media. Mr Menem promised that, if Argentine defence ministry investigators found proof of atrocities, 'we are ready to formally take the issue to the United Nations, the European Community and the Organisation of American States.' Mr Menem's announcement marks a shift in Argentine policy. The government, particularly the army, had ignored claims made by Argentine troops shortly after the war about atrocities committed by British soldiers. Officials subsequently played down allegations of war crimes first made in 1991 by British ex-servicemen. Former British troops have said in books and in media interviews that they saw troops execute Argentine prisoners after the Battle of Mount Longdon, one of the bloodiest of the 45-day war. Meanwhile, an Argentine defence ministry official said yesterday that his department began an inquiry of its own last year, in reaction to British investigations, but said it 'did not get very far.' The ministry asked Argentine witnesses to come forward with evidence of atrocities, but received only a few calls from ex-combatants, one of whom claimed to have been shot at close range after the Battle of Mount Longdon. Most of the investigations have been carried out by Britain's ministry of defence and crown prosecution service. Negotiations are under way to allow a visit to Argentina by Scotland Yard detectives to question ex-combatants.
19930604000000000	FT  04 JUN 93 / World Trade News: ECGD resumes exportcover to Argentina. BRITAIN'S Export Credits Guarantee Department is resuming export insurance cover to Argentina, 11 years after its suspension following the 1982 Falklands conflict and the onset of Argentina's decade-long debt crisis, writes John Barham in Buenos Aires. Mr Michael Heseltine, UK trade and industry secretary, who is on an official visit to Argentina, said this had been made possible by the 'substantial improvement in the way Argentina has been servicing its debts'. British exporters have been clamouring for ECGD cover as economic conditions improve in Argentina. Although Argentina's free market reforms have led to a substantial increase in imports, British sales remain depressed; exports rose to Pounds 118.7m in 1992 from Pounds 69.7m in 1991. Exporters are likely to be disappointed by the Pounds 100m ceiling on coverage and the high premiums, expected to be in the range of 14 per cent. Officials said this reflected Argentina's poor debt repayment record and high risk of insolvency or non-payment.
19930907000000000	FT  07 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Shephard to seek co-operation on 'fragile' south Atlantic fisheries. MRS GILLIAN Shephard, the UK agriculture minister, yesterday stressed the need for co-operation in protecting 'fragile' South Atlantic fish stocks as she prepared to become only the third British cabinet minister to visit Argentina since the Falklands conflict 11 years ago. Relations between the two countries were soured again last May when Britain decided to extend territorial waters to 200 miles around South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, neighbours of the Falklands, and to introduce a fishing licence system there to halt overfishing by third countries. Argentina claims sovereignty over the two islands, as well as the Falklands, where Britain has operated similar restrictions since 1987. Last year Argentina introduced a cut-price licensing system for vessels operating in its waters which has poached many of the Falklands' best customers. Mrs Shephard said yesterday, on the eve of a week-long trade promotion trip to three south American countries, that there had been discussions on the issue of fishing limits at European Community level, with Spain particularly interested in fishing for squid and hake in the South Atlantic. 'We need agreement between the respective authorities to conserve fish for the mutual benefit of all parties,' she said. 'Fish stocks there are fragile and limited.' She will also urge Argentina to lift its ban on imports of British cattle for breeding purposes. Argentina is one of the 17 countries that still ban cattle imports because of the 'mad cow disease' outbreak in the 1980s. Mrs Shephard said the Paris-based Office International des Epizooties, the international animal health organisation, had agreed there was no longer any problem with British cattle exports. Her visit to Argentina, accompanied by a team of British businessmen and agricultural experts, follows separate trips by Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, and Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, earlier this year. Her first stop today will be Paraguay, where she expects to meet Mr Juan Carlos Wasmosy, the first freely elected civilian president. She will then visit Uruguay and lastly Argentina. The objectives of the trip are to promote British food and drink, as well as agricultural expertise and machinery.
19930908000000000	FT  08 SEP 93 / Cavallo visits London for talks. MR DOMINGO CAVALLO, Argentina's economy minister and architect of one of the world's most surprising economic miracles, arrives in London this morning for a three-day visit. Mr Cavallo, the first Argentine cabinet minister to make an official visit to Britain since the 1982 Falklands conflict, will meet Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor of the exchequer, Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England. The visit confirms the rapidly improving ties between the UK and Argentina since President Carlos Menem took office in 1989 and adopted pro-western foreign policies and free market economics. Mr Cavallo became economy minister in 1991 and rapidly transformed Argentina into one of the world's fastest-growing economies. However, the unresolved dispute over the Falklands - which Argentina still claims - means that no date is likely to be set soon for a visit by Mr Menem. As well as meeting UK government officials, Mr Cavallo will give a lecture at the London School of Economics and a speech at the Confederation of British Industry. He will also chair a seminar with potential investors at Baring Brothers, the merchant bank with a long, if turbulent, history of business with Argentina. Britain has shown growing interest in Latin America as economic reforms across the continent create new trade and investment opportunities. British banks and companies, notably British Gas, have been active in Argentina's privatisation programme. Mr Cavallo's arrival in London follows a flurry of visits by senior British ministers. Earlier this year Mr Hurd and Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, visited Buenos Aires. Mrs Gillian Shephard, agriculture minister, arrives in Argentina on Saturday for a brief official visit and Mr Guido di Tella, Argentina's foreign minister, will visit London in November.
19930916000000000	FT  16 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Shephard hopeful that Argentina will lift 'mad cow' ban. MRS Gillian Shephard said she hoped for a rapid lifting of the ban on imports of British cattle to Argentina after talks held during her recent trade promotion trip to three South American countries. Argentina remains one of 17 countries still banning British cattle for breeding because of the outbreak of 'mad cow disease' in the 1980s. Mrs Shephard who has left officials behind in Argentina to continue negotiations on lifting of the ban, said some very real progress had been made. 'Not that Argentinian beef needs improving - they have some of the most magnificent animals in the world - but there is enormous enthusiasm for freshening the stock and there will be opportunities for co-operation.' The ban applies chiefly to frozen embryos and semen used for introducing new strains to beef cattle. Mrs Shephard said Argentina was also interested in improving techniques in the pig industry and was keen to co-operate with UK experts. Mr Eric Thain, executive director of the Scottish Agricultural College, who accompanied Mrs Shephard on her trip, said he had agreed a deal to co-operate with Argentina's technology institute on a wide range of farming issues, including pig breeding. Mr Thain will also be helping the Argentines with sustainable farming methods and vaccinations for foot and mouth disease. Mrs Shephard touched on the sensitive issue of fish stocks in the South Atlantic during her trip, but she said the issue of sovereignity of the Falkland Islands was not mentioned. A two-week spell of dry weather in Argentina's farming belt could hurt production of the 1993-94 wheat crop, traders have warned, Reuter reports from Buenos Aires. Stunted seedling growth in vast crop areas - caused by the recent lack of rain and a previous 70-day drought - could inflict losses of up to 1m tonnes, they added. Seasonal wheat sowing was concluded in the past week, with farmers planting a total 5.2m hectares.
19931021000000000	FT  21 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Argentina secures bigger share of fishery resources. BRITAIN AND Argentina have reached a new agreement on sharing fish resources in the South Atlantic and waters surrounding the Falkland islands after two days of talks in Buenos Aires. The one-year arrangement favours Argentina, which will increase its share of a substantially extended fishing effort next year - raising its catch of the prized illex squid by 70 per cent to 220,000 tonnes. The Falklands will retain its present quota of 150,000 tonnes. The agreement is to be signed in London early next month during an official visit by Foreign Minister Guido di Tella, in which Argentina's claims to the islands will inevitably feature prominently on the agenda. The accord will increase pressure on the islands' financial revenues, which depend heavily on the sale of fishing licences. The islands' government forecasts a 35 per cent fall in licence revenue next year to between Pounds 15m and Pounds 15.5m. Argentine negotiators say, however, that 'the islands could not delude themselves that we would never develop our fishing industry. This agreement allows them to plan ahead'. Argentina is likely to continue increasing its share of the catch in future years. Britain had hoped to strike a long-term agreement with Argentina that would protect the islands' revenues. But Argentina is tying such an agreement to concessions by London over shared development of the islands' possible oil reserves and the lifting of the UK's arms embargo, imposed during the 1982 Falklands conflict.
19931101000000000	FT  01 NOV 93 / Argentine minister to strengthen UK ties. ARGENTINA'S foreign minister, Mr Guido di Tella, begins a three-day official visit to Britain today, the second by an Argentine minister this year and an indication of rapidly improving ties. He will see Mr John Major, the prime minister, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary. In September, Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minister, made the first official trip to Britain by a minister since the 1982 Falklands war. Three British cabinet ministers have visited Buenos Aires this year. Relations began improving after President Carlos Menem took office in 1989 and adopted pro-western foreign policies and free market economics. However, the unresolved dispute over the Falklands means that Mr Menem is unlikely to be invited to London soon. The two sides have agreed on other questions, principally fisheries. Mr Di Tella will sign a new one-year fishing agreement. FT  01 NOV 93 / Argentine minister visits UK. ARGENTINA'S foreign minister, Mr Guido di Tella, begins a three-day official visit to Britain today, the second by an Argentine minister this year and an indication of rapidly improving ties. He will see Mr John Major, the prime minister, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary. He will also meet opposition politicians and business leaders. In September, Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minister, made the first official trip to Britain by a minister since the 1982 Falklands war. Three British cabinet ministers have visited Buenos Aires this year. Relations began improving after President Carlos Menem took office in 1989 and adopted pro-western foreign policies and free market economics. However, the unresolved dispute over the Falklands means that Mr Menem is unlikely to be invited to London soon. Mr Di Tella is trying to win over the Falkland islanders by convincing them that Argentina has changed for the better. He has met Falkland representatives and broadcast to the islands via the BBC World Service. But suspicious Falklanders reject his advances and Britain refuses to discuss the islands' political future. The two sides have agreed on other questions, principally fisheries, the Falklands' main source of revenue. Mr Di Tella will sign a new one-year fishing agreement. However, Britain refuses to lift its arms embargo preventing Argentina from replacing aircraft shot down in 1982.
19940126000000000	FT  26 JAN 94 / British offer over Falklands oil. The British government has indicated its readiness to allow Argentine companies to take part in the development of oilfields in the Falkland islands' territorial waters - provided they acknowledge that any oil extracted belongs to Britain. Government sources think it unlikely that Argentine interests will end up operating installations on the islands themselves, but believe Argentina's coast could be a logical site for support operations. Preliminary results from seismic surveys conducted last year around the Falklands suggested the possibility of finding oil across a zone 25 per cent larger than the North Sea. The disclosure of Britain's position follows a recent request from Buenos Aires for a meeting of senior foreign ministry officials to discuss joint development of oil resources. London has yet to agree to this meeting. Reaching an oil accord with the UK is Argentina's next important policy objective, but it is unlikely to accept terms that implicitly recognise Britain's sovereignty over the islands. Buenos Aires has used recent talks on fish to press for a role in the development of possible oil and gas reserves. British Gas said last year it had discussed joint offshore exploration close to the disputed waters with YPF, Argentina's state-owned oil company. Some Falkland islanders are said to recognise that rapprochement with Argentina would probably be necessary if an oil industry were to be developed. Recent developments come against a background of steadily improving relations between the two former belligerents. A year ago, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, became the first UK cabinet minister to visit Argentina since the 1982 Falkland islands conflict. Since then both Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister, and Mr Guido Di Tella, foreign minister, have visited Britain.
19940520000000000	FT  20 MAY 94 / Argentina seeks UK N-cash. Argentina is hoping to attract UK investment in its soon-to-be privatised nuclear industry, as a result of a series of contacts at government and company level, according to senior officials. Mr Carlos Bastos, Argentine energy minister, has been in London this week on an official visit which marks a further step in the normalisation of UK-Argentine relations since the Falklands War in 1982. Mr Bastos, who was invited to the UK by the foreign office, met his counterpart at the department of trade and industry, Mr Timothy Eggar. The department described the talks as 'friendly and constructive,' but refused detailed comment. Argentine officials say their country has no political objections to British companies operating its two nuclear power stations, Atucha I and Atucha II. Argentina has also offered to co-operate with international research and development of a cost-effective, safe standard nuclear reactor.
19940830000000000	FT  30 AUG 94 / Falklands rivalry tests quick tempers: Diplomats in Buenos Aires must learn the mating and migratory habits of squid. Argentina reacted furiously when the UK government last week announced a seemingly innocuous decision to extend control over a 547 square mile patch of ocean outside fishery control areas around the Falkland Islands. The Argentinians declared they would not 'tolerate, accept and much less consent' to the move. The UK claimed poachers used this so-called 'Gap' area as a bolt-hole. Even though the Gap lies within Falklands territorial waters, British officials say they tried to discuss the issue with Buenos Aires all year. The Argentinians kept postponing talks and the British decided to act unilaterally. President Carlos Menem angrily said he would send patrol ships into the Gap, even though it lies outside Argentina's 200-mile territorial limit. Although he played down the issue later in the week, the Falklands remain a contentious and sensitive issue. British diplomats posted in Buenos Aires must master the intricacies of fishing data and develop a thorough understanding of the mating and migratory habits of Illex squid, the islands' main resource. The Illex travels through Argentine and Falkland waters, so both sides now hold talks to share the catch. They have learned to co-operate over protecting squid, to preserve what has become a very big industry. They swap catch data, establish quotas and keep each other posted about the position of poachers. Although Falklanders sneer at Argentina's inability to patrol its waters effectively, the coast guard is notoriously aggressive. Trigger-happy captains often pepper poachers with gunshot. Last May, a Taiwanese ship sank after fleeing into Falkland waters when a coast guard cutter fired on it. Licence sales are a vital revenue source for the Falklands. This year's fish licence sales of Pounds 24.1m make up nearly two-thirds of government revenues. However, this is a far cry from the boom years of the 1980s. In 1989, the islands raked in a record Pounds 28.8m from fisheries. Next year, the islands do not expect to sell more than Pounds 16.6m worth of licences. The main reason for this is competition from Argentina which recently launched a rival licence regime of its own, selling 60 licences this year, priced to undercut the Falkland licences. Furthermore, this year's Illex season was exceptionally bad. Ships caught only 67,000 tonnes in Falklands waters against an historical average of 165,000 tonnes. Both Argentina and the islands closed the Illex season early to preserve the stocks. In addition, a fisheries agreement between Argentina and the European Union has led to a big increase in catches. The pact allows European vessels to enter Argentine waters once closed to foreign ships in exchange for grants and privileged access to EU markets. Brussels wants to find new fishing grounds outside European waters, mainly to benefit Spain's big fishing fleet. In 1993, 915,500 tonnes of fish were caught in Argentine waters, 126 per cent more than five years earlier. Although these statistics are not reliable, they do indicate a rising trend in fishing effort. Argentina now exports more fish than beef. Fish export revenues last year rose 18 per cent to Dollars 660m. Hake accounted for nearly half Argentina's 1993 catch of 422,000 tonnes, an increase of 14 per cent over 1992. Squid volumes rose 150 per cent to 194,000 tonnes. But Mr Julio Torre, the editor of Redes, a fishing trade publication, warns: 'Catches are reaching their limits for several species, especially hake. Blue whiting and squid are also approaching their limits. For the first time, this region is reaching its limit.' Although fishing has become a big earner for Argentina, its under-funded and overstretched navy, air force and coast guard are unable to prevent poaching. It is anyone's guess how much fish is really caught in the South Atlantic.
19941116000000000	FT  16 NOV 94 / Observer: Hands off Argentina. Today Argentina gets out the red carpet for the UK's Duke of York, the first official royal visitor since the end of the Anglo-Argentine Falklands war in 1982. Prince Andrew, a helicopter pilot in that war, today re-inaugurates in Buenos Aires a statue of 19th century British statesman George Canning, which had its hands lopped off by anti-British protestors in 1982, when the statue itself fell. Disagreement lingers over what exactly happened to the statue, once toppled. The British say Canning was stored away. Argentina's federation of war veterans says the 'great English thief' was 'deposited in the murky waters of the River Plate as an act of repudiation against British imperialism'. And what of Canning's hands? Have the originals been re-affixed, or are they tucked away in a Buenos Aires apartment? 'You can rest assured that it will not be a statue without hands,' is the signal from the Foreign Office.
19941209000000000	FT  09 DEC 94 / World Trade News: British boost for Argentina. Argentina's campaign to re-establish itself as a trustworthy trading partner was boosted yesterday with the underwriting of a Dollars 9.5m buyer credit by Britain's Export Credit Guarantee Department, the biggest such deal since ECGD cover was restored in June 1993. The approval by the ECGD, which suspended cover after the Falklands conflict in 1982, will be seen by Argentina as a significant step towards repairing its damaged international image. In spite of the ending of hyperinflation and the unleashing of very fast growth rates, Argentina has not yet entirely overcome its past reputation, tarnished by military governments and virtual economic collapse. The ECGD decision follows the successful bid by Babcock International of the UK to supply computer-controlled inspection equipment to the Atucha II nuclear power station being built 70 miles north-west of Buenos Aires. Although ECGD premiums to Argentina were reduced by Britain last December, UK businessmen in Buenos Aires complain that the country-risk premium is still too high, given Argentina's recent solid economic performance. Mr Nicolas Grose-Hodge, president of the Argentine-British Chamber of Commerce, believes British companies may have lost millions of pounds worth of business because high ECGD premiums have rendered bids uncompetitive.
