10000000000000000	Pakistan and the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty What has Pakistan s demonstrated behavior been toward the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty  Include Pakistan s explanation for the behavior and international reaction to it.
19960307110000000	Pakistan Uses Nuclear Capability Peacefully: Spokesman. ISLAMABAD, March 7 (Xinhua) -- "Pakistan has nuclear capability, but has decided at the highest level not to use it for non-peaceful purposes," a Pakistani Foreign Office spokesman said here today. Addressing a press conference at the Foreign Office this afternoon, he strongly refuted the report that Pakistan was preparing for a nuclear test. The Washington Post daily quoted some US officials as saying Wednesday that Pakistan was preparing to conduct its first underground nuclear explosion in Pakistan's Baluchistan province. "The government of Pakistan has issued a statement on such issue, and I will not add any more to the statement, except to say that Pakistan will take appropriate steps to safeguard its security," said the spokesman. The statement described the Washington Post's story as "speculative and based on faulty leaked intelligence reports." "Pakistan has been in the vanguard locally and regionally to advance the cause of nuclear non-proliferation," said the spokesman. "Our many proposals, including the simultaneous signing of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty by India and Pakistan as well as the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia, have fumbled because of India's negativism," he added. The US government has also criticized India recently for preparing for its second nuclear test.
19980520000000000	Pakistan Praises China's Nuclear Stance, Condemns India. ISLAMABAD, May 20 (Xinhua) -- Pakistani Foreign Secretary Shamshad Ahmad on Wednesday described China's stance on the nuclear issue as "mature and highly responsible." He said it was "in sharp contrast to the irresponsible stance of India." "As you know, China is the only nuclear weapon state which has repeatedly and authoritatively stated that it will never under any circumstances be the first to use nuclear weapons," Shamshad told reporters upon his arrival at the Islamabad airport after concluding a two-day visit to Beijing. "This mature and highly responsible approach to issues of international peace and security by China stands in sharp contrast to the irresponsible statements emanating from the Indian leadership, threatening the use of nuclear weapons," he said. He said China, as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and signatory to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, has always advocated international peace and security and nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. "There was a complete identity of views between Pakistan and China on the gravity of the situation which had resulted from India's reckless actions and fictitious threat from China, invented by India as a pretext to promote its own hegemonic designs and aggressive agenda in South Asia," he said. "The Chinese government has already condemned in the strongest terms the outrageous actions of the Indian government to introduce nuclear weapons in South Asia which has destabilized the strategic balance in our region." "Our consultations with China are indeed an important facet of our wider consultations with all major powers as well as friendly countries to seek ways and means to effectively defuse tension and reduce the factors that have threatened peace and stability in our region," he said.
19980523000000000	Pakistan Will Not Give Up Nuclear Option: PM. ISLAMABAD, May 23 (Xinhua) -- Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif made it clear on Saturday that his country will not give up its nuclear option despite the mounting pressure from some big powers in this regard in the wake of India's nuclear tests. "We are not seeking any bargains," Sharif said in a written statement issued at a press conference here. It is the first press conference given by the prime minister since India conducted a series of nuclear tests on May 11 and 13. "Overt Indian nuclear weaponization has seriously upset the strategic balance in the region and emboldened India to make a naked assertion of her hostile intentions towards Pakistan," the prime minister noted. "Can the Pakistani nation afford to barter its independence, security and sovereignty? What is the price for liberty and freedom, dignity and honor?" he asked. "The talk of sanctions is not only familiar to us but it also does not rattle us. We have learnt to live with these punitive measures," he said. "Our legitimate need for security is still being ignored," he said, regretting that discriminatory policies were pursued by the Western world on the nuclear issue towards Pakistan. "Indian defiance (in nuclear tests) on the other hand has even now attracted some sanctions but more understanding. Some have even offered endorsement," he said. "No amount of condemnation or sanctions have changed the immediacy or magnitude of the threat to us. Practically sanctions mean little and change nothing," he said. "We believe that the Indian actions have rendered the non-proliferation regime and instruments such as Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty irrelevant," he said. "What did we earn in exchange of the restraint? Discriminatory and punitive measures were imposed on us. In a manifestly unjust and unfair approach Pakistan was penalized for every Indian escalatory step on the nuclear and ballistic ladder," he said. "The Indian record of aggression and irresponsible behavior is a stark reality for Pakistan. Our compulsions are not hidden. The balance of power in the region has been violently tilted," Sharif said. "Under these circumstances our undivided focus must be on the preservation of our national security interests," he said.
19980529000000000	Pakistan's Nuke Tests Draw International Concerns. BEIJING, May 28 (Xinhua) -- Some countries or international organizations expressed concerns after Pakistan exploded five nuclear devices on Thursday in response to the nuclear tests carried out by India on May 11 and 13. The United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Thursday he deplores both the Indian and the Pakistani nuclear tests. "They (India and Pakistan) exacerbate tension in an already difficult relations," he said in a statement. Annan's statement came after Pakistan announced it has conducted five nuclear explosions at 3:30 pm. local time (1030 GMT) Thursday in Chagai area in the southwestern province of Baluchistan. Annan called on both Indian and Pakistani governments to freeze their nuclear weapons development programs and sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and a no-first-use pledge with each other. In Luxembourg, Javier Solana, secretary-general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), said the alliance would urge India and Pakistan to exercise maximum restraint and to respect the international non-proliferation norms and the CTBT. Solana said the NATO does not consider sanctions against the nuclear testers. The NATO chief said the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan would not "dramatically" affect the thinking of the new strategic concept of the alliance. The United States President Bill Clinton announced in a televised statement Thursday that the United States would impose sanctions on Pakistan as it did on India. Clinton expressed the fear that Pakistan's nuclear tests might lead to escalation of tension in South Asia. Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien called on Pakistan and India to renounce their nuclear weapons programs and to sign on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and the CTBT. He also urged the two arch-rivals to renew regional dialogue and work towards a peaceful resolution of differences. Chretien announced his country's relations with Pakistan would now be placed on hold and that further measures would be announced in light of the development in both India and Pakistan. France, Canada Condemn Pakistani Nuclear Tests. NEW YORK, May 28 (Xinhua) -- More countries have come out to condemn Pakistan's nuclear tests. The French Foreign Ministry issued a communique Thursday to deplore and condemn the nuclear tests conducted by Pakistan on the same day. France calls on both India and Pakistan not to conduct any more nuclear tests but to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and join talks on the banning of production of fissile materials that can be used to produce nuclear arms, said the communique. Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy said in a statement released Thursday, "We continue to urge Pakistan and India to renounce their nuclear weapons programs and to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty." He also announced a series of sanctions against Pakistan, which he said are consistent with those imposed on India after its nuclear tests. Egypt, Israel Warns of Impacts of Pakistan's. CAIRO, May 28 (Xinhua) -- In reaction to Pakistan's nuclear tests, Egypt Thursday underscored the need to make the Middle East a nuclear-free region and urged Israel to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Meanwhile, Israel said it would be more dangerous if Iran has nuclear weapons. "If this kind of weapons get into hands of regimes like Iran, the danger of distablization will be ever greater," Israel Radio quoted David Bar-Illan, media adviser to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, as making a brief reaction to the nuclear tests. Pakistan detonated five nuclear devices Thursday, which is widely viewed as a response to India's five nuclear tests two weeks ago. Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Moussa said "This (nuclear test) places the region of South Asia in a special position in view of the presence of two nuclear powers in it." He said Israel, believed to be the only Mideast country with nuclear capabilities, should join the NPT and otherwise the treaty will become insignificant for the Middle East states. "Rendering the Middle East a region free from nuclear weapons is now a must for maintaining regional security," he said, stressing that all the states in the region should abide by the treaty.
19980529193700000	Turkey, Iran Concerned About Pakistan's Nuclear. ANKARA, May 29 (Xinhua) -- Turkey and Iran have expressed concern over the underground nuclear tests conducted by Pakistan to match India's five explosions two week ago. A statement issued by Turkish Foreign Ministry Friday said that the nuclear tests conducted by both India and Pakistan were of concern for regional and global stability and security. The statement said that the two neighboring countries should refrain from a reciprocal show of power and should solve their disputes peacefully. "Turkey wishes that this alarming development recorded in the recent weeks will not pave the way for a new nuclear arms race," it added. Pakistan detonated five underground nuclear devices Thursday, widely viewed as a response to India's five nuclear tests on May 11 and 13. India has so far refused to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, calling them discriminatory. Iran has called on Pakistan and India to cease nuclear tests and rivalry and join the comprehensive test ban treaty. Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi said on Thursday that Iran follows with deep concern the ongoing chain of events concerning nuclear tests, the official news agency IRNA said in a delayed report on Friday. Mohammadi said that the current nuclear race poses a serious threat and danger to regional peace and stability, a race which is first and foremost the consequence of lack of political will on the part of the nuclear powers to heed the call of international community for a comprehensive nuclear disarmament. The spokesman warned that in the absence of an all-encompassing program for comprehensive nuclear disarmament, the status and future of Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty would face great uncertainty.
19980530000000000	World Continues Deploring India, Pakistan Nuclear Tests. BEIJING, May 30 (Xinhua) -- Politicians from Europe and South America continue to criticize India and Pakistan for conducting nuclear tests, urging the two South Asian countries to abandon plans for future tests. At a cabinet meeting on Friday, Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini said Italy deplores the 10 nuclear tests India and Pakistan have conducted, asking the two neighbors not to test any more nuclear devices. Summoning Pakistani Ambassador Arif Ayub on Friday, the Italian Foreign Ministry voiced concerns over the Pakistani tests, adding that India and Pakistan should start talks now and solve conflicts with the help of the international communities. India set off five underground nuclear devices two weeks ago, igniting global anger. Pakistan, in response, also exploded five nuclear devices on Thursday, claiming the tests were done for the sake of national security. The recent nuclear tests in the two countries have caused worldwide concern over the possibility of a new arms race, which could result in dangerous consequences on the South Asian subcontinent. "The nuclear tests have a direct relationship with the development of nuclear weapons," the Peruvian foreign ministry said in a press release. "And in consequence, they are a real danger to the stability of the region and to international security." The press release said it is urgent to stop nuclear testing and create nuclear-free zones. The Peruvian government noted that universal adherence to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and the complete ban on nuclear tests is a guarantee against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari and Argentine President Carlos Menem, who is visiting Finland, held a joint press conference Friday. They expressed firm opposition to the Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests, which have resulted in international sanctions against both New Delhi and Islamabad. However, Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov, who is also visiting Helsinki, said Moscow does not support sanctions. Believing that sanctions achieve nothing, Moscow did admit that the nuclear tests have made situations in South Asia explosive.
19980601183700000	Saudi Arabia, Iran React to Nuclear Tests. CAIRO, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Saudi Arabia called on India and Pakistan to show great self-restraint, saying that nuclear tests conducted by both countries do not serve security and stability in the region, Kuwait News Agency reported Monday. Saudi Information Minister Fuad Al-Faresi was quoted as saying that his country understood the viewpoint of Pakistani government as to safeguarding its security, but "we still calls on both Pakistan and India to practice self-restraint and resume negotiations to ensure security and stability in South Asia." Al-Faresi made the remarks in a statement after the weekly cabinet meeting. He also said his country hopes the international community to avoid double-standard policy which turns a blind eye to Israel's nuclear facilities. Saudi Arabia supports a full ban of nuclear proliferation and seeks to make the Middle East a region free of mass-destruction weapons, he said. Pakistan, in response to India's nuclear tests on May 11 and May 13, carried out six nuclear tests last week. Meanwhile, Iran's Defense Minister Ali Shamkhani said on Monday that Tehran is against any nuclear test intended for weapon purposes, but favors civilian use of nuclear energy. With Russian assistance, Iran is building a nuclear power plant in Bushehr in the south. This has raised doubt that Tehran may be seeking access to nuclear weapons. "Iran wants the Middle East and the Persian Gulf to be free from non-conventional weapons," Shamkhani said. He said Iran supports compliance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and Comprehensive Test Bank Treaty, but holds that elimination of non-conventional weapons and disarmament of Israel are prerequisites for banning proliferation of nuclear arms.
19980604000000000	Russian Foreign Ministry on Nuclear Power of India,. MOSCOW, June 3 (Xinhua) -- Russia does not see India and Pakistan as nuclear club members though they conducted a series of nuclear tests, Russian Foreign Ministry stated on Wednesday. The Interfax news agency quoted the Ministry's spokesman Valery Nesterushkin as saying that "Despite the series of nuclear tests conducted by India and pakistan, Russia views them as states that do not possess nuclear weapons." The spokesman said, "It is precisely in this capacity that we urge these countries to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty." In accordance with the treaty, a country is considered a nuclear state if it had produced and tested a nuclear weapon or another nuclear device by January 1, 1967, Nesterushkin said. Meanwhile, in experts' opinion, neither Pakistan nor India has done everything necessary to convert nuclear devices to warheads and place them on delivery vehicles. On the meeting of foreign ministers of the five nuclear powers (Russia, the United States, France, Britain, and China) in Geneva on Thursday, the spokesman said, "the basic goal of the meeting is to coordinate positions and find approaches that would conduce Delhi and Islamabad to stop further development of their nuclear programs and join the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty." American States Urge India, Pakistan to Stop Nuclear Testing. CARACAS, June 3 (Xinhua) -- Members of the Organization of American States (OAS) Wednesday urged India and Pakistan to conduct no more nuclear tests similar to those they carried out last month. In a resolution passed at the 28th OAS annual meeting, foreign ministers or their representatives from the 34 member states unanimously condemned the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan last month. The resolution said that the tests not only violated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) but also threatened peace and stability in South Asia. It urged India and Pakistan to sign immediately and unconditionally the NPT and seek peaceful means to settle their differences. The resolution called for utmost restraint and renouncement of any new nuclear testing plan on the part of the South Asian countries in question. It also stressed the importance for all countries in the world to sign the NPT and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, as the two pacts are basic factors in preventing nuclear proliferation and promoting nuclear disarmament.
19980604091800000	Kashmir called source of newly nuclear India-Pakistan rivalry. NEW DELHI, India (AP) _ An international meeting Thursday on India's nuclear rivalry with neighboring Pakistan likely means that the world's five original nuclear powers will address the main dispute between the two countries: Kashmir. 
19980604170800000	Nuclear club refuses to admit India, Pakistan, nations call for. GENEVA (AP) _ The five longstanding nuclear states refused Thursday to admit India or Pakistan into the nuclear club and called on them to refrain from further nuclear tests and resolve their differences with direct talks. 
19980605224800000	Security Council considers resolution against nuclear programs in. UNITED NATIONS (AP) _ Hoping to curb the nuclear arms race in South Asia, the Security Council considered a Japanese resolution urging India and Pakistan to halt nuclear weapons programs and denying nuclear status to the two rivals. 
19980609135700000	Sharif slams Big-5 for their double standards', THE INDEPENDENT. WASHINGTON, D.C. 20003 Tel: 202-547-4512 Fax: 202-546-4194 COPYRIGHT 1998 BY WORLDSOURCES, INC., A JOINT VENTURE OF FDCH, INC. AND WORLD TIMES, INC. NO PORTION OF THE MATERIALS CONTAINED HEREIN MAY BE USED IN ANY MEDIA WITHOUT ATTRIBUTION TO WORLDSOURCES, INC. 
19980615110700000	Swiss cut back aid to Pakistan and India after blasts. BERN, Switzerland (AP) _ Switzerland will slash its development aid to India and Pakistan because of the two countries' nuclear tests, the Swiss government said Monday. 
19980702000000000	Russia Calls on India, Pakistan to Join NPT. MOSCOW, July 2 (Xinhua) -- Russia on Thursday repeated its call to India and Pakistan to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Vladimir Rakhmanin, a spokesman for Russian Foreign Ministry said "Russia insists on immediate and unconditional accession" of India and Pakistan to the treaty, and the revision of their nuclear policies. Nearly 190 countries have joined the treaty, which took effect in 1970 and was extended indefinitely in 1995, he said. Russia wanted the pact to be universal. In a move that sparked global shock and concern, India launched underground nuclear tests on May 11 and 13, and triggered Pakistan to follow suit late that month, despite the risk of bringing about a nuclear arms race in the region. Despite opposition to the nuclear tests, Russia did not favor sanctions against India and wanted to carry out military cooperation with India if it respected Moscow's line on nuclear disarmament. "Russia has developed and will continue to develop its military cooperation with India within the framework of international norms and national legislation," Rakhmanin said. "However, Moscow would obviously watch Delhi's response to Russia's line towards nuclear disarmament," he said. But Alexei Yablokov, a well known Russian environmental expert, told Interfax the NPT was, in effect, violated by Russia's plan to supply India with nuclear technology. Russia and India, on June 21, signed a deal supplementing the Soviet-Indian agreement of 1988 on cooperation in construction of a nuclear power station in Kudankulam, said Yablokov.
19980710053600000	India's prime minister keen to meet Pakistani counterpart. NEW DELHI, India (AP) _ India's prime minister said Friday he looks forward to meeting with his Pakistani counterpart later this month to discuss the issues over which they fought two wars and launched a nuclear arms race. 
19980915000000000	No CTBT Clause to Affect Pak Nuclear Program: Qadeer. ISLAMABAD, September 14 (Xinhua) -- Pakistan's scientists Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan and Dr. Ishfaq Ahmed said here Monday that no clause of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) will affect Pakistan's nuclear capability. In a briefing for the members of the two houses of Parliament, the two renowned scientists said there is no need to further nuclear tests at present as Pakistan has achieved its objectives from the tests conducted on May 28 and 30. "The CTBT cannot take away anything of us that we have achieved as a result of nuclear blasts. WE can maintain our nuclear capability without conducting more tests," Qadeer said. He, however, said there would be no cut in the present stock material. Qadeer said Pakistan maintained its nuclear capability for a long time without conducting test. "We conducted nuclear tests on May 28 and 30 to convey the message to the world that Pakistan has become a nuclear power," he said. Asked as to whether Pakistan would open its nuclear installations for inspection after signing the CTBT, Qadeer said, "there is no clause in the Treaty which allows inspection. The Treaty only bars new tests." He also said that Pakistan has already announced moratorium on nuclear tests.
19980921110300000	India, Pakistan criticized for nuclear testing. VIENNA, Austria (AP) _ India and Pakistan joined the ranks Monday of traditional targets Iraq and North Korea for flaunting nuclear weapons conventions, as the U.N. atomic agency opened its annual conference. 
19980923172500000	Pakistan says it will adhere to nuclear test ban treaty. UNITED NATIONS (AP) _ Pakistan's prime minister said Wednesday his country would unilaterally adhere to the nuclear test ban treaty, but called on international pressure to force rival India to do the same. 
19980923173300000	UNITED NATIONS: speedily lifted.. ``Pakistan is ... prepared to adhere to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty before this conference,'' Sharif told world leaders at the U.N. General Assembly session. 
19990216000000000	Japan Urges Pakistan to Sign CTBT Before India. ISLAMABAD, February 16 (Xinhua) -- Japan Tuesday urged Pakistan to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) before India, saying it would boost the image of Pakistan in the international community. "We urged Pakistan to ensure progress in the nuclear field and ink the CTBT before India," a senior Japanese official said after talks held here between officials from the two countries. "Tokyo will appreciate Pakistan if it takes the initiative to show adherence to the non-proliferation treaty," Director in the Japanese Foreign Ministry Kazauya Ogawa said. He said the Japanese delegation, led by Deputy Foreign Minister Minoru Tamba, stressed the need for legislation to tighten control over the export of nuclear technology to third country. "We conveyed our concern over the cooperation between Pakistan and North Korea in the nuclear field and told the Pakistani side that it would affect ties between Pakistan and Japan," Ogawa said. However, Pakistan's Foreign Secretary Shamshad Ahmed, who led the Pakistani side at the talks, rejected reports that Islamabad is receiving any assistance from third country in the nuclear field. "We also asked Pakistan to refrain from further test of missile and stop the production of fissile materials," Ogawa said. Pakistani officials, he said, told the Japanese side that Pakistan is participating in the talks on Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) in Geneva. Japan agreed that Kashmir is the root cause of tension in South Asia and hoped the tension would reduce through bilateral talks between Pakistan and India, said Ogawa. Japan is ready to facilitate Pakistan and India to hold talks in Tokyo if the two countries agree, he said. Asked whether Japan would lift sanctions if Pakistan signs the CTBT, Ogawa said Tokyo could partially restore aid to Pakistan after its signing and ratification of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Japan, the largest donor to Pakistan, slapped economic sanctions after the country's nuclear tests last May. Japan had extended 500 million U.S. dollars to Pakistan annually. Pakistan has been for several months under tremendous pressure by the Western countries to ink the CTBT before the sanctions are lifted. The main purpose of the Japanese deputy foreign minister's visit is to convince Pakistan to sign the CTBT. In the wake of nuclear tests last May, the Japanese government stopped granting aids and loans to Pakistan and decided not to support Pakistan in getting loans from international financial institutions like the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and Asian Development Bank. During Pakistani Foreign Minister Sartaj Aziz's visit to Japan late last year, the Japanese government removed its opposition to Pakistan's getting loans from international institutions, but refused to lift sanctions before Pakistan signs the CTBT.
19990809183600000	Saudi Arabia Backs Eliminating Mass Destruction. KUWAIT CITY, August 9 (Xinhua) -- Saudi Arabia on Monday renewed its support to efforts in eliminating weapons of mass destruction, especially in the Middle East region, the Kuwait News Agency reported. Riyadh is "looking forward to seeing the Middle East region free of all kinds of mass destruction weapons," said Saudi Crown Prince and Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Ibn Abdul-Aziz during a weekly cabinet session he chaired in the country's western city of Jeddah. He voiced concern at the possession by many countries of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, urging all nations to join the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and open their nuclear facilities to international inspection. Abdullah's remarks came after Saudi Second Prime Minister and Defense and Aviation Minister Sultan Ibn Abdul-Aziz denied any Saudi attempts to acquire nuclear weapons from Pakistan or any other country. In response to a question over his visit to a uranium enrichment plant and a missile factory in Pakistan, Sultan said it did not "exceed the entrances of the sites and did not include secret facilities as reported." Earlier reports said that British officials were worried that Riyadh might have sought to buy nuclear weapons from Pakistan.
20000523000000000	Pak Vows to Maintain Nuclear Deterrence. ISLAMABAD, May 23 (Xinhua) -- Pakistan said Tuesday that it will maintain credible nuclear deterrence to prevent any aggression against it. "We will act according to our best national security and national interest," Pakistan's Foreign Office spokesman Iftikhar Murshid said at a press conference here while answering a question about reported possible further nuclear tests by India. "Our nuclear policy is to maintain credible nuclear deterrence, " he added. In a statement he made on behalf of Pakistan's Foreign Minister Abdul Sattar, the spokesman regretted the position taken by the Sixth Review Conference on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT) toward the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan in May 1998. "We did not initiate the induction of weapons capability into the region. Nor was Pakistan the first to conduct nuclear explosive tests," the statement said. It accused India's nuclear tests of destabilizing the security environment in South Asia, saying Pakistan's tests "restored the strategic balance." "Therefore, the distinction between the nuclear ambitions of India and the compulsions of Pakistan must be acknowledged and preserved," it said. The sixth NPT review conference, which Pakistan "decided not to attend because of the changed nuclear realities in South Asia," ended in New York on May 20. Pakistan expressed its appreciation of the conference's call for the observance of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), describing it as "a positive contribution to the strengthening of the no-test norm." "Having voted for the CTBT in 1996 and declared a unilateral moratorium on further tests in 1998, Pakistan will maintain its policy of responsibility and restraint," said the statement. Neither Pakistan nor India has so far signed the CTBT, which will not gain effect until all the 44 countries concerned sign and ratify it.
