10000000000000000	Electric Automobile Development What is the current status of research and development on electric automobiles  What are the positive and negative factors for their usage  Which companies are involved in their development.
19900104000000000	GM UNVEILS AN ADVANCED ELECTRIC PASSENGER CAR. General Motors Corp., hoping to steal a lead in the race to develop lower-emissions vehicles, Wednesday unveiled a prototype electric passenger car that can go 124 miles on a single charge and even outrace some internal combustion vehicles. The Impact, a teardrop-shaped two-seat car, has a top speed of 75 m.p.h. and would place GM "on the cutting edge of technology," GM Chairman Roger B. Smith said at a news conference in Los Angeles. The sleek car, powered by 32 10-volt lead-acid batteries, was designed from the ground up as a practical electric car for the consumer market, Smith said. In that, it differs from other electrical vehicles under development, which are essentially converted delivery vans intended for commercial fleets. He maintained that the Impact is "producible" as currently designed, although production will depend on its meeting federal safety standards, consumer acceptance of an electric car and financial feasibility. "There are no yet-to-be-solved secrets," Smith said. "The thing is its marketability . . . . We want an electric car that's producible, that can handle itself on the highway and that can meet the federal standards out there and that is a marketable product. We believe we've accomplished two-thirds of that." The soonest that GM would go into production is 1993 or 1994, said John S. Zwerner, executive director of GM's advanced product engineering department. "The public generally perceives electric vehicles as slow-moving golf carts," Zwerner said. "The Impact absolutely shatters that perception." Observers, including state and local air quality officials, praised the new car, which was designed and engineered mainly in Southern California. "This is certainly as advanced as anything I'm aware of," said Arnold Fickett, a vice president of the nonprofit Electric Power Research Institute, funded by the electrical utility industry. "It's a giant step forward." GM engineers borrowed from a prototype GM solar vehicle, the Sunraycer, to give the Impact a lightweight, aerodynamic design and improvements in motor and controls that partly account for the car's range, speed and acceleration: 0 to 60 m.p.h. in 8 seconds. A GM video showed the Impact out-accelerating Mazda Miata and Nissan 300ZX sports cars. GM said it uses about a third of the energy of a conventional car. Smith refused to estimate how much the car would cost if it went into production, except to say that it would be priced competitively with other cars. He refused also to say how much GM spent developing it. Some industry observers said they do not see a big consumer demand for the cars, short of federal or state requirements. "I think, in a free market situation, with no market incentives, electrically powered cars would have no impact," said Chris Cedergren, a senior automotive analyst with J. D. Power & Associates, an Agoura Hills auto market research firm. "They would have to be forced on consumers." Smith admitted that the car has drawbacks. For one thing, at current gasoline prices and electricity rates, the car would cost about twice as much to operate as a conventional auto: about $70 a month, compared to $40 a month for a gasoline-engine auto driven 10,000 miles a year. That is mainly because of the batteries' relatively short life. An Impact owner would need to replace the battery pack every 20,000 miles at a cost of roughly $1,500. The electricity to run the car would cost about $5 to $12 a month, Smith added. Expected improvements in battery design in the next three to four years could extend battery life to 50,000 miles, which would make monthly operating costs competitive with those of conventional autos, Smith added. Unlike electric vehicles that use exotic nickel-iron or sodium-sulfur batteries as power sources, the Impact uses lead-acid batteries, whose 870 pounds account for about 30% of the car's total weight. But improvements in battery design eliminate the need to add water and also overcome some of the traditional drawbacks of electric vehicles: low speed, short range and the relatively long time it takes to recharge. The average electric vehicle now has a top speed of 50 to 70 m.p.h. and a range of 60 to 100 miles. It typically takes up to 12 hours to recharge an existing electric vehicle. But GM said the Impact can be charged halfway in as little as half an hour and almost fully recharged in six, simply by plugging the vehicle into a home circuit. Eventually, Smith said, he foresees recharging circuits being placed around cities, much as some Canadian cities put outlets at parking meters to power engine warmers. Because the Impact is designed as a consumer car rather than as a fleet vehicle, it would have a much broader market than electric vans -- a necessity for mass production of a new vehicle, analysts said. GM would have to sell more than 100,000 Impacts a year to make production feasible. The market for vans converted to electric power from gasoline engines may be fewer than 20,000 a year, observers said. Proposed federal and local clean air standards may spur acceptance of electric vehicles generally because they are virtually pollution-free. The California Air Resources Board is considering a proposal to require that 15% of new vehicles sold by the year 2003 be so-called ultra-low-emission vehicles, which would include electrics. "There's definitely a need for alternative fuels, and this shows that the kind of standards that the Air Resources Board is working on are feasible and realistic," said Bill Sessa, a spokesman for the California Air Resources Board. "It's consistent with the kinds of emissions standards that we are developing for the future." Electric vehicles would, in effect, transfer pollution from cars to the power plants that produce the electricity for the vehicles. But that would still result in pollution reductions of up to 90%, said Tom Eichhorn, a spokesman for the South Coast Air Management District, because of greater efficiency at the power plants. It is unlikely that new power plants would need to be built, at least in the near future, to meet demand from such vehicles. Electrical utilities such as Southern California Edison have enough excess capacity to power electrical vehicles, especially if most recharging occurs at night -- typically a utility's period of lowest usage, said Lawrence Hamlin, manager of research at Edison. GM is not the only company working on electric vehicles. The Electric Power Research Institute has worked with both GM and Chrysler to develop electric-powered vans for eventual production. Ford Motor Co. is developing its own electric-powered van.  GENERAL MOTORS' IMPACT Power: Two electric AC motors, one for each of the front wheels. Battery pack: 32 10-volt lead-acid batteries, total weight 870 lbs. Can be recharged in about six hours on ordinary household current. Acceleration: from 0-60 m.p.h. in eight seconds. On the highway, can accelerate from 30-60 m.p.h. in 4.6 seconds. Range: 124 miles on one charge. Cooling system: Fan-assisted flow-through air cooling. Tires: Special low-resistance tires, inflated to 65 psi (double the inflation of ordinary tires). Weight: 2,200 lbs.
19900106000000000	L.A. AUTO SHOW FOCUSES ON GLITTER, PRACTICALITY. General Motors may get the spotlight and come in for the most curtain calls at the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show when it opens today at the L.A. Convention Center. Subject of the hoopla is the introduction of a prototype electric passenger car. The Impact, which can go 124 miles on a single charge and even out-accelerate some internal combustion cars, was unveiled to the press Wednesday. Unlike other electric vehicles that are conversions of existing cars or vans, GM's version was designed from the ground up as a practical electric car for the consumer market. A teardrop-shaped two-seater, the Impact has a top speed of 75 m.p.h. and is powered by 32 10-volt lead-acid batteries. General Motors officials have said the car places GM "on the cutting edge of technology" and it could be on American roads by 1994. Rivaling GM for attention will be 24 never-seen-in-North America production cars and 11 concept cars. All this is among the 650 late-model cars and specialty vehicles that will be on display. Auto shows have as much of their own style as the wide variety of glittering new cars. And in recent years, the L.A. show has come to be among the world's most prestigious, ranking with shows in other car capitals such as Tokyo, Paris, Frankfurt and Detroit. Historically, concept cars -- or design studies, as they are sometimes called -- have been used at auto shows for publicity purposes and as elaborate business cards. What's changed for the '90s is that these futuristic vehicles lean more on practicality than ever before as manufacturers fight for niches in the world's most hotly contested car market. Among the concept entries this week are Subaru's SRD-1, Cadillac's Solitaire, Chrysler's Millennium, Oldsmobile's Aerotech III, Isuzu's 4200-H, the Dodge Viper, Ford's Splash, Buick's Lucerne convertible, Plymouth's Speedster, Pontiac's Stinger and the Porsche Panamericana. To maintain a low-pressure atmosphere, exhibitors agree to a no-sales policy. "What we try to do," says Jeanne Hoover, manager of sales promotion and merchandising for Mitsubishi Motor Sales, "is give the public as much information as we can. At the show, all of us encourage people to touch, sit in and look at just lots of cars. It's a terrific place to compare." Most of the exhibitors staff their displays with a combination of dealership and manufacturer personnel, who are usually selected for the assignment because they are especially knowledgeable about not only their own products but those of other manufacturers. Several companies, including Mitsubishi, offer sophisticated computer services so that interested consumers can print the manufacturer's suggested price lists to use later if they plan to visit a retail dealership. According to show manager Andy Fuzesi, most of the more than 500,000 people who will visit the show are potential buyers. "Of course, not everyone is in the market for a car when they actually come to the show," he says, "but, especially in Southern California, they will be sometime during the next few years." Many who attend the show are hard-core car buffs, people who want to know about anything and everything that's automotive. They visit the show to take in its vibrant atmosphere and enjoy the varied displays of vehicles. Among cars making their North American debut in the L.A. show are (in no particular order): Avanti's elegant 4-door touring sedan; the long-awaited Lotus Elan; Mitsubishi's 3000GT; Buick's Park Avenue; Ford's Escort and Explorer; the Alfa Romeo Spider and 164; a Hyundai sports coupe, Chevrolet's new Caprice Classic, Beretta convertible, Camaro, four-door Blazer and Geo Metro convertible; Dodge's stunning Stealth; the completely restyled Toyota MR2 and new Land Cruiser; BMW's new 850i; Oldsmobile's Bravada sport/utility vehicle; a Mercury Capri; Dodge's Shadow convertible; a Pontiac Firebird and a new Ferrari, the 348. And for the first time on the West Coast, Honda's Acura division will display its top-of-the-line mid-engined, two-seat sports car, called the NSX. This is the car Honda management hopes will unseat Ferrari and Porsche as the leading world-class production sports cars in the $60,000-and-up class. While the one-of-a-kind cars, debut models and sports cars get most of the attention, they are only a small part of an overall event that includes vehicles of all kinds: trucks, vans, antiques, racing cars, utility models, customs, and every family sedan, econo box and sport coupes (as opposed to sports cars) built just about anywhere in the world. Because of sold-out space limitations at the convention center, there is little room for accessory people, although two well-known automotive artists who work in different media will be in the main hall. Keith Collins, who elevated the lowly automobile floor mat to expensive art, also creates tapestries depicting some of the world's most exciting automobiles. None of his superb work is inexpensive, but then again there aren't many walls that wouldn't benefit greatly from his art. Collins will share exhibit space with automotive realist Harold Cleworth, who is among America's most popular and best-known automotive artists since moving here from the United Kingdom. Cleworth, who does paintings for car manufacturers and private customers in addition to creating posters, exhibits at the L.A. show mainly to meet people and autograph posters. Because the car business has become as hard-edged as a heavyweight boxing match, more manufacturers are touting their cars, trucks and vans as "task specific." That's a lofty way of saying vehicles will be advertised to specific groups. For example, what was "perfect for a family" may now be "perfect for a family with two blue-eyed, black-haired male children who travel with two cats and a West Highland Terrier." Emphasis on automotive muscle, speed and lots of horsepower will continue into the '90s. We can expect to see more super cars with prices to match and breathless claims for speeds in excess of 200 m.p.h. Already there are at least a dozen performance cars that can hit 150 m.p.h. right off the showroom floor. Electronics are also an increasing part of the automotive future, and it's anticipated the value of current electrical equipment (from about $500 per car) will triple by 1995. Look for navigational systems, microwave object detection, video mirrors, antitheft devices and keyless locks to join complex entertainment and diagnostic systems. Active suspensions that adjust automatically to road and driving conditions will become more common, as will antilock braking and electronic traction controls. All of these components and systems offer value (and cost) to consumers. However, the best news may be a statement from an automotive executive who said: "No matter what we do or how much we add, the only cars that really will be hot items are the ones that are fun to drive." Attending the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show is even more convenient than before with the addition of shuttle buses, supervised child care, a low price and hours that should suit everyone. The show runs from today through Jan. 14. Hours: Monday-Friday noon to 11 p.m. Saturdays: 11 a.m. to 11 p.m. Sundays: 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. Adult Admission: $5; children 12 and under free when accompanied by an adult. The L.A. Convention Center is at 1201 S. Figueroa St., off the Harbor Freeway. Call (213) 748-8531 for general show information.
19900203000000000	IRVINE INVENTOR FINDS INSPIRATION IN THE BIZARRE, EXTREME. Doug Malewicki would be the first to admit that some of his inventions have literally never gotten off the ground. Malewicki has invented a jet-powered motorcycle, a mileage-record-setting car, a speed-record-setting bicycle, a popular game for kids and a car-chomping mechanical dinosaur that performs at monster-truck shows. Malewicki is a real-life version of the scientist named Szalinski, portrayed by actor Rick Moranis in the hit movie, "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids." Szalinski mistakenly zapped his children to sub-insect dimensions. "Yeah, you could say I related to that movie," said Malewicki, who has lived in Irvine for 12 years. "I'm sure some of my friends thought I was a little crazy with some of my first inventions." The jet-powered motorcycle, Evel Knievel's Skycycle, made a highly publicized but unsuccessful attempt to jump the Snake River Canyon in Idaho. Malewicki designed and engineered the steam-powered motorcycle that barely got off the ground, but rocketed Knievel to greater fame, nonetheless. "It was a sham, but people started looking up to me after the association with Evel Knievel," Malewicki said. "Even though the project didn't work, my peers knew how much thought and work went into building the Skycycle." Malewicki has had other disappointments. Before he could claim the world land-speed record of 152.284 m.p.h. for a bicycle, he had perhaps the world's fastest flat tire on a memorable day in 1985 at the Bonneville Salt Flats. Three-time U.S. Olympian John Howard was mounted on the prototype bicycle that featured a double-reduction gear setup and was nearing 150 m.p.h. when the rear tire went flat. "The flat tire could have killed him," Malewicki said. "There were 1,600 Gs (the measure of gravity against an accelerating object) on the valve spring of the tire. We were really worried about maintaining the balance of the bike when we took the tire off." Malewicki's most successful project, the California Commuter, never brought him a dime but earned him a place in the Guinness Book of World Records. The prototype car got 157 miles per gallon on a trip from Los Angeles to San Francisco. "I'm most proud of that project, although it never took off," he said. "We left the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion and weren't on the road 20 minutes when three California Highway Patrol cars pulled us over in Woodland Hills. "They asked to see the operating license and started asking all kinds of questions about the car. They must have radioed ahead the entire trip because every once in a while another patrol car would pull up beside us, give us a signal and then take off." Malewicki's most profitable project has been a child's game, "Nuclear War." Self-described as "a comic, cataclysmic card game of global destruction for kids of all ages," it has been a best seller for Flying Buffalo Games for 25 years. An IBM computer version is due for release next month. "I've gotten a $300-a-month royalty check for that game for 25 years," Malewicki said. "They tell me if the computer game takes off, I could get $50,000 a year. "It's been a word-of-mouth type of game. The company tried advertising but found it sold more games by friends telling other friends how much fun it is to play. People wear the decks out and write for more." Malewicki's lastest project, Robosaurus, is a 40-foot-high, 56,000-pound, fire-breathing monster robot capable of lifting and crushing 4,000-pound cars. The machine, which took 18 months to build, moves freely with the aid of cylinders, valves, pumps, air brakes and air suspensions. A two-man crew strapped inside the monster's cranium controls its huge claws with fly-by-wire electronic equipment. Sound outrageous? Malewicki envisions his lastest creation as potentially his most profitable project. Investors earned $25,000 when the machine appeared at a recent two-day show that drew 67,441 spectators to Anaheim Stadium. Robosaurus rolled onto the stadium field, lifted a junk car 40 feet, tore off the car's roof with its steel jaws and then slammed it to the ground. Robosaurus is scheduled to appear in shows in Tempe, Ariz.; Toronto and Vancouver, Canada; Los Angeles and Indianapolis. Malewicki said he is also negotiating a deal with Universal Studios to produce a two-hour pilot television show. "This is my first real winner," Malewicki said. "It's King Kong, Godzilla and Star Wars rolled into one." Malewicki's next project will be to build a hybrid gasoline-electric vehicle, capable of traveling 145 m.p.h. and as far as 100 miles per gallon. Its gas engine will run a generator and an electric motor in each wheel will power the car. Malewicki plans to build the car in Irvine and then embark on a cross-country promotional tour. "Some of these things I've invented are crazy," he said. "But at some point, they become creditable and then acceptable."
19900312000000000	DRIVE FOR CLEANER AUTOS RUNNING INTO OBSTACLES. When a new clean air plan was adopted last year to rid the Los Angeles Basin of health-threatening smog levels within a generation, authorities were counting on millions of cars powered by clean-burning fuels to help make it work. Methanol-powered cars, they said, were just around the corner, and "ultra-clean" vehicles propelled by even cleaner fuels weren't far behind. Now, nearly a year later, car showrooms clearly are not brimming with alternative-fuel cars. Still, air pollution officials insist that they are on track and that, despite setbacks in Congress and challenges by industry, four out of every 10 cars on the road will run on cleaner fuels by the year 2000. In one sense, prospects have never seemed brighter. General Motors has unveiled the prototype of a futuristic electric car that accelerates from 0 to 60 m.p.h. in eight seconds and has a range of 124 miles between recharges. Last week PG&E opened the state's first public refueling station for vehicles that run on compressed natural gas -- by far the cleanest of fossil fuels. And Arco last September began marketing a reformulated gasoline, called EC-1, for pre-1975 cars that cuts their tailpipe emissions by 20%. At the same time, the state Air Resources Board is poised to require automobile companies beginning in 1994 to begin selling a new category of "low emitting" vehicles that are twice as clean as the cleanest new gasoline cars on the road. But there are obstacles on the road. GM has no target date for actually mass producing its electric car. Given existing battery technology, it would cost twice as much to operate as a gasoline car. And there are a relative handful of vehicles that run on natural gas. Moreover, while state government appears determined to charge ahead with ever more stringent tailpipe standards that will eventually force gasoline and diesel vehicles off the road, Congress is putting on the brakes. After a fast start by the Bush Administration in calling for the production of a million alternative fuel cars a year by 1997, Senate negotiators -- with White House acquiescence -- have all but scrapped the proposal. Where do these conflicting signals leave California? Will new generations of super-clean vehicles really be on the road soon enough for the Los Angeles Basin to meet federal clean air health standards in the 17 years that are left before a 2007 deadline? Although the Senate compromise drew fire from environmentalists, some members of Congress and air pollution authorities, it is not viewed as a major setback even if it remains intact. Regardless of what happens in Washington, California authorities say there is no turning back in the drive toward a new generation of cleaner cars. Federal backsliding, they said, will make the effort more difficult but not impossible. "We can do a lot without the Feds, but it's going to impact our ability to get ahead," said James M. Lents, executive officer of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. The struggle over cleaner cars comes at a time when major oil companies -- recognizing that alternative fuels such as methanol could eventually push gasoline out of much of the market -- are developing reformulated gasolines that burn cleaner than conventional gasoline. Arco's EC-1 is but the first in a line of cleaner gasolines expected to be developed by oil companies. Although reformulated gasoline will likely provide immediate clean air benefits, it is also a reason why auto makers are urging a go-slow approach in mass-producing cars that run on alternative fuels like methanol. They are especially concerned about consumer acceptance of a new line of vehicles. "It isn't fun taking a chance in the auto industry, because if you make a mistake you lose big. Just ask Ford when they produced the Edsel. It was a good car but nobody would buy it," said Tim MacCarthy, federal liaison director of the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assn. in Washington. At the same time, at least one major public policy research group, the World Resources Institute, is warning that methanol is not the way to go. The institute said methanol would fail to reduce U.S. dependence on foreign energy resources (because they said it would be made with cheap natural gas from OPEC countries) and would make a minimal contribution to clean air. It also said the drive toward methanol would divert scarce research and development dollars from more promising cleaner alternatives, such as hydrogen-powered vehicles. California officials say they can't wait. Action is required now. They said methanol is the next logical step beyond reformulated gasoline, while not ruling out any fuel that can meet or beat it. They point to differences in emission characteristics between methanol and Arco's EC-1. Although EC-1 would reduce smog-causing volatile organic compounds by 20%, a blended methanol fuel would cut those same emissions by 30%, compared to typical future gasoline cars. If the fuel was 100% methanol instead of blending it with 15% gasoline, the vehicles would emit 80% less VOC than future gasoline vehicles, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. No one denies the immediate air quality benefits of reformulated gasoline. Its strong point is that it could be used in every gasoline car on the road today. Although those gasoline cars are individually dirtier than, say, a car running on a methanol blend, there are more of them. Thus, said Lents, the overall air quality improvement from cleaning up great numbers of gasoline cars compared to a limited number of cleaner methanol cars would be about the same. "We could virtually achieve an equivalent overall reduction," Lents said. But Lents said reformulated gasoline should not become an excuse for going no further. "I don't want people to have outs. The system always has outs," Lents complained. "We've got to keep the pressure on." Although policy makers are careful not to exclude any fuel from consideration in the future, methanol is the near-term fuel of choice. It has a track record. About 1,000 cars running on pure methanol and 40 cars that can run on a blend of methanol and gasoline are operating in California. Another 1,000 are expected to be on the road by the year's end. The Southern California Rapid Transit District has placed 31 methanol buses in service to test their performance and durability. Indianapolis 500 race cars have long run on the fuel. Moreover, methanol as a liquid fuel can be phased into the existing transportation infrastructure that is geared to liquid fuels -- gasoline and diesel -- more easily than alternative fuels like natural gas or electric batteries. More importantly, major foreign and domestic auto makers are working on so-called flexible fuel cars that can run on either gasoline or methanol or any blend of the two, thanks to advances in computer technology. Methanol poses problems as well. It is corrosive and some engine parts would have to be made of stainless steel. Methanol gets about half the mileage of gasoline. Methanol emits more formaldehyde -- a known cancer-causing agent. None of these and other problems, however, are insurmountable, state officials say. Although methanol offers poorer mileage, the per gallon cost of methanol would be less than premium gasoline. Moreover, the state maintains that formaldehyde emissions can be reduced by development of a catalytic converter. There are, of course, political as well as technological problems. Congress appears to be putting on the brakes. A compromise ironed out last week between Senate negotiators and the White House all but foreclosed federal requirements on auto makers to produce cars that run on methanol or other alternative fuels. Rep. Jerry Lewis (R-Redlands), who authored legislation establishing the South Coast Air Quality Management District as a member of the state Assembly in 1976, said that unless car makers are required to build alternative-fuel cars, "an important first battle" will have been lost. "It would delay the time in which we would make the next significant step in the direction of seeing our mountains. It will impact the speed with which we move toward cleaner air," Lewis said. But California officials appear undaunted. "If Congress doesn't do it we still have full authority in California," said California Energy Commission chairman Charles R. Imbrecht. Next September, the state Air Resources Board plans to vote on far-reaching tailpipe standards that will all but require a massive shift from gasoline cars, barring some breakthrough that would dramatically clean up the fuel beyond the current and contemplated reformulated versions. If the board follows through, one out of every four cars sold in the state beginning in 1997 would have to emit 70% less smog-forming hydrocarbons than will come from the tailpipes of new gasoline cars in 1994. By the year 2010, board staff estimated, two-thirds of gasoline use in California would be displaced by the cleaner fuels. Auto makers would have to build the cars -- and oil companies would have to provide the fuel -- as a condition of doing business in the state. There is little doubt that California has the clout to impose such requirements. The federal government has given the state authority to exceed federal tailpipe standards, and California is a big market. One out of every 10 new cars sold in the United States is registered in California. Other states like New York are following the state's example. "If I was an air quality administrator in California I would beat my breast in pride that other states are nationalizing the California program," said MacCarthy of the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assn. That may be too sweeping a claim for California to make at this point, especially since Senate negotiators don't appear to be going nearly as far as California would like. How the clean fuels issue will ultimately resolve itself is as murky as the skies over Los Angeles. What is clear, however, is that political pressure continues to build for ever cleaner cars. The only question is how soon they will be on the road and what will be in their tanks.
19920109000000000	FT  09 JAN 92 / Technology: Electric vehicles gain momentum. A prototype of the electric car that BMW intends to sell in the US in the second half of the 1990s is on display at the Los Angeles motor show which opened to the public this week. It represents one of several developments on the electric car front in the past few weeks, with more manufacturers indicating their interest in commercial production of such vehicles despite their formidable cost and performance disadvantages compared with petrol or diesel cars. They are being spurred by the accelerating momentum in North America towards wide adoption of Californian clean air standards. These require that from 1998 zero emissions vehicles (Zev), in other words electric ones, make up 2 per cent of the sales of every manufacturer selling more than 35,000 cars in the state, rising to at least 10 per cent of annual sales from 2003. Manufacturers which do not comply will be barred from selling any cars in the state. In California alone, this means a forecast of 35,000 Zev sales in 1998, rising to more than 150,000 a year from 2003. However, a further 12 states, plus Washington DC, have now indicated their intention to adopt the California standards, which would mean 110,000 Zev sales in 1998 and more than 500,000 in 2003. Despite the fact that General Motors is already preparing a plant to produce the Impact, which GM intends to be the first electric car in volume production, GM, Ford and Chrysler collectively insist that other states do not have California's air pollution problems. But along with European and Japanese manufacturers seeking to maintain a presence in North America, they want vehicles ready to put on the market if California's standards spread throughout North America and into Europe. In the past few weeks Fiat has indicated its intention to produce an electric version of the Cinquecento, its new small car, and Citroen of France has unveiled a prototype electric town car, the Citela. Earlier this week Ford said that within a year it would have a fleet of 80 Ford Ecostar electric vans running commercial trials in several US and European cities. The BMW at Los Angeles, designated E2, strongly resembles an earlier prototype, E1, unveiled at the Frankfurt motor show in September. However, it has been 'stretched' to accommodate a bigger battery pack for long distances and to provide extra interior room for the Californians who initially will buy it. Styled by Los Angeles-based Designworks, of which BMW is part owner, the E2 is claimed by BMW to have a maximum range of 267 miles; acceleration to 50mph in 15.6 seconds and a top speed of 75mph. The batteries are high-energy sodium-sulphur. Problems include an eight-hour recharging time and a battery cost of around DM40,000 (Pounds 14,000). Citroen's model, the Citela, is a city car with a recyclable body. Citroen claims a range of up to 130 miles, a top speed of up to 70mph, and a quick recharge facility - of one minute per mile of range.
19920324000000000	FT  24 MAR 92 / Technology: Sparks fly over electric car - Fiat is undeterred by the limits of batter power. Next month Fiat, the Italian car maker, will start selling an electrically-powered version of the Cinquecento, its new Polish-built mini car.  At around L26m (Pounds 12,000) in Italy, the Cinquecento Elttra will cost roughly 2.6 times as much as a well-equipped petrol version. It will have a maximum range of 70km in urban driving conditions and a top speed of 80kph.  Where the rear seats of the conventional model will accommodate two adults in surprising near-comfort, the Elettra has only a raised platform behind the front seats, beneath which resides a lead acid battery pack weighing more than 700lbs.  The Elettra is thus strictly a two seater. Even the most senior figures behind its introduction, Ettore Panizza, technical director of Fiat's electrical and electronic systems division, and Fabio Massimello, production and marketing director of its electrical vehicles programme, acknowledge that its performance is 'miserable' in comparison with the Cinquecento's petrol-engined versions. The Elettra, like an electric version of the more basic Panda which preceded the Polish-built car into production, exists because it is Fiat's conviction that Italy's cities will soon legislate and electric vehicle industry into being. The legislation will not be identical to that of California, where any manufacturer wishing to sell more than 35,000 cars a year will have to make at least 2 per cent of them 'zero emissions' (electric) starting in 1988. But Massimello forecasts that it will be just as effective. From 1994-95, he says, cities across Italy will start closing their centres to all but electric cars.  Limited closures are already taking place in Modena and Florence, where pollution monitoring equipment shows unhealthy pollution levels being reached.  But so far they have been mostly haphazard, temporary or - as in the case of Rome - simply flouted through loopholes. As the trend spreads, so Fiat sees its electric car sales inexorably rising.  'At present, I think we will sell only 150-200 in 1992-93, rising to 400-500 in 1994 and 1,000-1,500 in 1995,' says Massimello.  'But then we see a sharp rise - to 5,000 in 1996, 10,000 in 1997 and 20,000 in 1998.'  By 2000, Fiat expects the Italian market alone to be absorbing 70,000. Massimello agrees with Jean Yves Helmer, director in charge of the electric vehicles programme at France's Peugeot, that by the end of the decade Europe overall will be providing a market of between 200,000-250,000 electric cars a year. Like Peugeot, Fiat stresses the financial burden of developing purpose-built EVs (electric vehicles) for a market that currently does not exist.  'But at a volume of 10,000-15,000 units a year it becomes financially viable to develop and manufacture purpose-built electric cars,' says Panizza. 'Ordinary' cars such as Cinquecento or Peugeot 106 are not ideal for adaptation.  Produced in steel, they are heavy, and lack specially designed bulbous bodyshell which could compensate for the bulky battery and allow more room for passengers. Perhaps the ultimate current demonstration of what purpose-building an electric car can achieve is provided by the General Motors Impact. Lightweight composite materials and low-drag aerodynamics give it a top speed of more than 100mph.  Production is scheduled to start in three or four years.  However, neither Fiat nor Peugeot is concerned about such high performance - at least for Euopean Markets. They see electric cars 'as little car for the city only', says Massimello. After a great deal of market research, Fiat has found that most people require a maximum range of 35km per day.  Since the average speed of traffic in a typical Italian city is 12-15 kilometres an hour, the range seems sufficient. Even so, the Elettra is likely to be bought by only the most ardent - and well-heeled - environmentalist.  Not surprisingly, after more than a year of availability, the electric Panda has sold almost exclusively in companies with a vested interest in the electricity supply industry. To ease the transition, Fiat's EV programme leaders expect future governments to provide VAT exemption and possibly other fiscal incentives to encourage EV's. 'It is very important to try to get cost closer to that of an ordinary car,' says Massimello.  'A customer might be expected to pay 10-15 per cent extra, not 2.6 times extra,' he says.  Not least, he acknowledges, this is because there is little prospect of an EV ever being a direct substitute for an 'ordinary' car,  'It will be only the second or third vehicle in a family,' he believes. The EV industry's development in Europe has serious implications for component suppliers. Fiat believes that a pan-European collaboration is required between manufacturers.  To help make that possible, there is a perceived need for an EC legislative framework to deal with safety and other construction and use implications as the industry develops. European legislators should be helped by the example of the US, which is already much ahead in assessiong issues such as the chemical safety of some advanced batteries - high-temperature sodium-sulphur, for example - and permissible voltages within the power train. The electric motors, charging systems, accumulators and other technical ingredients of the Elettra come from several souces, including in-house Fiat operations.  In no sense do they represent a long-term commercial supply structure. The current price disadvantage of all electric cars requires a big effort to achieve economies of scale in component production, Panizza stresses. It should be possible to halve the current costs.  But that means Europe's car makers agreeing to share core componentry.  For example, although Fiat has the capability to build an electric drivetrain in house, 'suitable electric motors need to be produced at a rate of at least 1,000 a day to get a financial return', says Massimello.  So it would make sense, he suggests, for production to rest with specialist motor producers already expert in the field. There is already a trend in Europe towards sharing research and development in areas such as batteries, according to Fiat. And in the US, a collaborative project between General Motors, Ford, Chrysler and federal agencies is spending Dollars 1.2bn over the next decade to establish the most promising new battery technologies. The sharing of specifications at an early stage may mean that the purpose-built electric cars of the late 1990s will share - under their differing skins and manufacturers' labels - components that are mostly common and this relatively inexpensive.
19920708000000000	FT  08 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Hydrogen car moves on to the horizon - John Griffiths finds Mazda pushing ahead with an emission-free fuel. Mazda, Japan's fourth largest car maker, is shortly to seek Japanese government approval for an on-highway test programme for hydrogen-powered cars, whose exhaust 'fumes' consist of non-polluting steam. The company has concluded that hydrogen-powered cars are technically achievable more quickly than is commonly believed within the industry. Over the coming months, it plans to start negotiations with Californian state authorities on making hydrogen cars acceptable under the strict new exhaust emissions legislation that California is phasing in from 1997 onwards, and to explore possible systems for refuelling them. Part of the Californian legislation, which is being considered for adoption by up to a dozen other states, requires 2 per cent of manufacturers' sales to be of 'zero emission vehicles' from 1998, rising to 10 per cent by the early 21st century. Virtually the entire motor industry has accepted the fact that the legislation's time scale can only be met with battery-powered cars. But while Mazda has already developed its own battery cars to meet the legislation, Michinori Yamanouchi, senior managing director of Mazda Motor Corporation, says that electric vehicles in general will be far too expensive and limited in their performance to have anything but a restricted future as urban runabouts or light commercial vehicles. According to Mazda, the Wankel rotary petrol engine - which it, alone among car makers, now produces - can be adapted more easily than conventional petrol engines to run on hydrogen. Cars fitted with it could reach the marketplace for a price about 20 per cent higher than a petrol-powered equivalent - 'in other words for about the cost of air conditioning and audio equipment', says Yamanouchi. In contrast, he says, 'we estimate that even if electric vehicle technology really advanced, their price would be twice that of a gasolene car at minimum. And that price ratio would be the same even if a manufacturer were to be making 10,000 units a month'. Mazda is by no means alone in researching hydrogen-fuelled cars. Mercedes and BMW of Germany are among those which have produced prototypes. However, difficulties with combustion in adapted, conventional reciprocating engines and on-board fuel storage, and scepticism about the ease with which a hydrogen manufacturing and refuelling infrastructure could be set up have led most manufacturers to suggest that viable hydrogen cars are still years off. According to Mr Yamanouchi, the design of the rotary engine eliminates the premature combustion problems normally associated with using hydrogen as a fuel in conventional engines. Mazda has also launched a collaborative project with Nippon Steel Corporation, Japan's largest steel maker, to set up a pipeline fuelling supply system for the test programme, using as the feedstock hydrogen from one of Nippon Steel's manufacturing plants, where hydrogen is a major but mostly wasted by-product. Yamanouchi expects the steel industry to be a future producer and marketer of hydrogen in its own right. Chemical plants, which generate hydrogen as a by-product, could be also harnessed to localised supply networks. In Japan there will be a network of hydrogen fuelling stations by the early 21st century, he predicts. Mazda's vision of a fuelling infrastructure for hydrogen is based on it being in gaseous form. BMW, in contrast, has based its prototype on the use of hydrogen in liquid form, requiring insulation of both fuelling system and the vehicle's fuel tank to allow temperatures close to absolute zero. 'If the determination is there, we can set up hydrogen pumps and pipelines fairly easily in terms of technology and finance,' Yamanouchi says. He is also relatively dismissive of concerns about the safety aspects of hydrogen, should it leak into a boot interior, for example. It is undetectable by sight or smell, but Yamanouchi insists that, being lighter than air, it would disperse quickly - and it possesses a combustion point higher than gasolene. Mazda regards the biggest problem as how to store the hydrogen in sufficient volumes in the vehicle. Its solution, adopted also for the prototype Mercedes fleet, is a fuel tank filled with a metallic hydride capable of soaking up large quantities of gaseous hydrogen and re-releasing it when heated. Fitting enough hydrogen into the tank is still a problem, however, as it is a much less dense fuel than gasolene. Nevertheless, one prototype has achieved continuous running for 200km at maximum speeds of 150kph. Yamanouchi's predicts that in 30 years, petrol or diesel-powered cars will account for just 10 per cent of the world's total car output, having been supplanted mainly by hydrogen cars but also by a much smaller proportion of battery powered urban vehicles. As for California's forthcoming legislation, Mazda believes that the problems of limited range and performance of battery-powered cars, and even their refuelling infrastructure, will become much more apparent as its enactment draws nearer. It believes that California's Air Resources Board and other legislative bodies involved will face a sea of difficulties in persuading Californian motorists to buy and use them. 'Already, I have heard that the ARB is feeling itself as Hamlet in Shakespeare,' says Yamanouchi. Mazda therefore expects the Californian authorities to welcome the proposals for a hydrogen alternative. It is considering talking to other manufacturers that have an interest in the technology for a co-operative approach to introducing hydrogen cars to California. Among those most likely to be interested is Mercedes, which last year updated its thinking on hydrogen vehicles in the form of the F-100 concept, shown as Mercedes' 'car of the future' at the Detroit motor show. Even Mazda, however, acknowledges that production of hydrogen - on the huge scale required to provide significant substitution for petroleum - is a large technical challenge. Hydrogen may be the most abundant element in the universe, and the ninth most abundant on earth, but making it from water - the most sensible route on a large scale - involves electrolysis, using a direct external energy source. Clearly, if the energy to provide this came from fossil fuels, the whole exercise could be self-defeating from both the emissions and energy conservation points of view. For large parts of the transport-using world - not least sunny California - solar energy could prove the answer. One group highly active in the field, Texas Instruments, claims already to be generating solar electricity at close to the domestic tariff rate of Southern California Edison, the electric utility.
19920725000000000	FT  25 JUL 92 / Survey of Second Cars (8): Still very much a curiosity - Battery Cars / For many a household, a second car with a 13 amp power socket instead of a petrol filler cap would be ideal. A BATTERY CAR would be cheap to run, especially if its power cells were recharged at night with low tariff electricity. It would also be virtually silent, entirely non-polluting (at least it would be at the place where it was being used) and exceptionally easy to drive. Environmentalists keep on saying the battery-electric is the car of the future. They may be right. And there is no doubt one would suit many second car users right now; the kind who average a couple of thousand miles a year and rarely go more than 10 or so miles from home. With so much apparently going for it, why does the battery car, which is as old as the motor industry, obstinately remain a curiosity? First, it has to be said that an electric battery is not a source of energy but merely a convenient means of packaging and storing electrical energy generated elsewhere. That usually means in a thermal power station, spewing hundreds of tons of sulphurous fumes and carbon dioxide gas from its chimneys every day. And which actually turns into electricity only 30 per cent of the energy contained in the mountain of coal burned in its boilers. Once the electricity has been generated, it has to be carried around in the car's storage batteries. They are its Achilles' heel. A kilogram of petrol contains 300 times as much energy as a kilogram of lead/acid batteries. There are other kinds. Alkaline batteries cost more and are just as heavy, though they do have a longer service life. Super-efficient batteries, two or three times as powerful for their weight as today's lead/acid kind, have been under development for years. They are costly and still far from commercial production. Some have to operate at several hundred degrees Celsius. A pack of those would not be the happiest companion in a small car. Every major manufacturer has produced prototype battery electric cars. All suffer to a greater or lesser extent from the same intractable problem. You can give a battery car quite a long range, vigorous acceleration or a high top speed - but not all together. They are mutually exclusive. Britain leads the world in the use of battery-electrics. There are about 30,000 on the UK's roads: most of them are milk floats. They go well enough when fully charged so they do not hold up the traffic when leaving the dairy before dawn. But it's a different story a few hours later. Batteries half discharged, they creep back to base, dragging tails of exasperated motorists behind them. However, something must be done to reduce city centre noise and air pollution. Demand for non-polluting vehicles will grow and electric propulsion will have a big part to play. It is, though, a Catch-22 situation. Until there is a demand for large numbers of battery electric cars, they will cost far more to make than much more practical internal-combustion engined cars. And until they are as cheap as - ideally cheaper than - motorcars, there will be no real demand for them unless it can be artificially stimulated. Electric cars are already exempted from the Pounds 110 annual tax and more concessions might be offered to popularise them. Perhaps owners might be allowed to park them on single yellow lines or use bus/taxi lanes at peak times. There needs to be some incentive. Knowing you are setting a good example is not enough to persuade many people to buy a slow, limited range battery-electric, costing twice as much as one running on petrol as a second car. Battery-powered cars already exist. Peugeot has been producing a limited number of electric 205s, with a bonnet full of batteries instead of a petrol or diesel engine. It is said to have a range of up to 100 km (62 miles) at modest speed on level ground and a top speed of 100 kmh (62 mph), though not for very long. With all that weight up front, it cannot help being heavy to steer but it hums along the flat, climbed hills well and goes down them even better. It has no gears and its fuel costs are a fraction of a petrol car's - but the massive battery pack will need replacing every four years or so at a cost of perhaps Pounds 1,000. More recently, Fiat has introduced a battery-electric Cinquecento baby car at the same time as the two petrol-engined versions. The Cinquecento Elettra is only a two-seater; the batteries take up the space of both rear seats and boot. Quaintly, the electric motor drives the front wheels through the petrol car's clutch and five-speed gearbox, though you can treat it as a one-gear car if you wish. Neither car is on sale in Britain. Perhaps the battery-electric second car will only take off if (some think it is when) petrol or diesel engined vehicles are prohibited from using urban centres altogether. This is unlikely to happen until the 21st century (less than eight years away, remember) but let no-one think it impossible. Motor dealers in California, where the exhaust catalyser first became mandatory, have been told that 2 per cent of the cars they sell must be totally non-polluting, which means battery-electric, by 1998. By 2003, the proportion will be 10 per cent. Surely it couldn't happen here? But who could have forecast in 1985 that by the end of this year every petrol-engined car sold in Britain and throughout Europe would need to have a catalytic converter? For all their snags, battery electric second cars could become a popular choice sooner than now seems possible. The shape of second cars to come? Honda's EP-X concept car is specifically designed as ultra-compact, personal transportation for two. The tandem seating allows the car to be narrow for slipping through traffic, while allowing more side impact protection than is possible with two-abreast seating. A one litre engine and lightweight aluminium body promote fuel efficiency; a lift-up canopy allows driver and passenger to enter from either side of the car. As with most concept cars, the EP-X itself is unlikely ever to enter production but some of its core design ideas are expected to appear on future models.
19920729000000000	FT  29 JUL 92 / International Company News: Renault and Peugeot in electric car accord. RENAULT and Peugeot, the French carmakers, yesterday announced a co-operation accord to help the development of electric cars over the next three years. They have agreed to set up battery recharging points, servicing and maintenance for electric cars in at least 10 French cities, with the help of a FFr500m (Dollars 98.03m) government research grant, of which FFr300m is set aside for this project. Electric cars, produced in very small numbers in France, have a future as second cars for short journeys, said Mrs Segolene Royal, environment minister. Around half of every car journey made in France is less than 3km and second cars travel on average less than 40km per week, the ideal range for electric vehicles, she said. France's plentiful supplies of low-cost nuclear generated electricity provided a good environment for electric cars, said Mr Dominique Strauss-Kahn, industry minister. The aim is to build a compatible infrastructure to support Peugeot's and Renault's separate ranges of electric cars by the time they come into commercial production. Peugeot estimates there will be a European market for at least 200,000 electric cars a year by the end of the decade. Peugeot and its sister company Citroen over the past three years have sold 300 small commercial vans, conventional models converted to electric power, mostly to local authorities. It plans to launch an adapted electric Peugeot 106 hatchback and a Citroen AX in 1995, 50 of which will go on trial at La Rochelle. Renault also has a pilot range of electric vans, based on a six-year test by local authority services in Chatelleraut, south-west France. These are due for commercial sale next year and Renault is planning to sell an adapted electric Clio hatchback from 1994. Further ahead, it is working on two purpose designed electric cars, as distinct from converted models. These are the Elegie, designed for short-range city use, for possible sale from 1995, and the Vert, with both petrol and electric engines for longer journeys, for possible sale at the end of the decade.
19921212000000000	FT  12 DEC 92 / Motoring: Best of both worlds - Volvo's hybrid runs on batteries in town and a gas turbine elsewhere. NO ONE really knows what kind of cars we will be driving 10 years from now, although it is a safe bet that most will have internal combustion engines. But they will create less pollution than vehicles today: politicians, and a rising ground swell of public opinion in favour of environmental protection, will see to that. Some, but not many, will be electric. They will be confined mainly to city centres and could be the only kind of car allowed in the most environmentally sensitive areas. The idea of an almost silent, non-polluting electric car is attractive but the problems are great. Relatively cheap lead-acid batteries are extremely heavy while more efficient batteries - which are far from lightweight, anyway - are costly. For at least 30 years, there has been talk of a radically new kind of battery that would make electric cars competitive with petrol or diesel cars. The breakthrough seems as far away as ever. Electric town cars of the mid-1990s will be conversions of existing models like the Citroen AX, Fiat Cinquecento and Peugeot 106. Later, purpose-designed battery-driven town cars will be introduced. Nearly all the major manufacturers have made battery-powered conversions of their smaller petrol cars and delivery vans. Most also have displayed advanced electric car prototypes at motor shows. But all battery-driven cars have a problem. They can provide good acceleration and a reasonable highway cruising speed, or an operating range approaching that of a normal car on, say, a half-tank of petrol. But not both. So, while a battery vehicle might be practical as a second car, used for short range commuting or shopping, it is a non-starter as an alternative to the family-cum-business car. Enter the hybrid. It offers the best of both worlds by running on electricity in town and petrol or diesel on the highway. As a battery car, its speed and range are modest but sufficient. Out of town, though, it goes like a normal vehicle. Its engine is quite small and creates minimal pollution because it runs at a fairly constant speed and is coupled to a generator feeding current via the batteries to an electric drive motor. Most of the time, the hybrid is no more than an internal combustion-engined car with an electric transmission. But for overtaking or hill climbing, the power stored in the batteries (which the engine keeps fully charged, of course) provides a useful performance boost. The concept is not new. I drove an experimental Fiat 131 hybrid, with a one-litre Fiat 127 engine, about 20 years ago. Advanced petrol and diesel-electric hybrids based on the VW Golf and Audi quattro were seen at Geneva show in 1990. PSA (Peugeot-Citroen), a leader in developing practical battery-electric cars, unveiled a diesel hybrid 405 estate last year with a 130 kmh (81 mph) top speed and a range of 750 km (470 miles) at 100 kph (58 mph). A more advanced PSA hybrid, with a gas turbine-driven generator, is under development. But little Volvo (well, it is little in the car makers' international pecking order) unveiled a turbo hybrid a few weeks ago at the Paris show and brought it out again at Birmingham. Volvo's ECC (for environmental concept car) is based on the theory that although cars must be environmentally clean, they need to be proper five-seaters and not - in the words of its design director, Englishman Peter Horbury - 'Dan Dare shopping baskets.' The EEC, which I drove very briefly in Sweden this week, is just that. A medium/large four-door saloon of most un-Volvo-like elegance, it has a small, diesel-fuelled gas turbine coupled directly to a high speed generator. This spins so fast - at up to 90,000 rpm, the same speed as the turbine - that it need be only a fraction of the size and weight of a conventional generator. Its 40 kw (call it 56 horsepower) output might not sound much for a car the size of a Volvo 850. But the ECC is aerodynamically slippery and has tyres with low rolling resistance. And although a 770 lb (350 kg) battery pack accounts for 22 per cent of its total weight, it is still fairly light. This makes it reasonably lively (a top speed of 108 mph/175 kh) and very frugal: 47 mpg (6.0 l/100km) in town and 54 mpg (5.2 l/100 km) on the open road. On a full tank, it will go for 416 miles (670 km) at 56 mph (90 kmh. Exhaust emissions from the gas turbine are lower than those of any car in use today. The ECC has a two-speed automatic tranmission and front-wheel drive. When I tried it, the batteries were partly discharged, but I reckoned it would have held its own in town traffic. The gas turbine takes 30 seconds to start, during which the EEC can be driven on its batteries. Its odd, but not objectionable, whine can hardly be heard inside the car. Do not plan on buying an ECC, though. The only one in existence reflects so much research and development that it must be worth nearly its weight in gold. In any case, it is a working concept, not a production prototype. A hybrid car can never be as cheap as a straightforward petrol or diesel vehicle. It does, after all, have two power units. But Volvo thinks the electrical and electronic equipment should not be too expensive if produced in quantity. And it says the gas turbine is not much more complicated than a turbo-charger. So, it seems that in the increasingly green years that lie ahead, a hybrid's price might have to be paid if we want to drive proper, full-sized cars in towns - or, perhaps, even drive them at all.
19921214000000000	FT  14 DEC 92 / US groups combine work on electric car. AMERICA'S big three car makers - General Motors, Ford and Chrysler - are to co-operate much more closely in the development of electronic vehicles. The trio have signed an agreement to investigate co-operation in the design, development, testing and possible manufacturing of electric vehicle components which would ultimately be used in each company's own vehicles. The announcement comes as financially-troubled GM, the biggest of the three US groups, scales back its much-vaunted solo effort in the field of electric vehicles. The venture will take place under the auspices of the US Council for Automotive Research (Uscar), an umbrella body which co-ordinates research among the big three, and it will aim to find 'the most effective way to hasten electric vehicle development'. Electric vehicles are currently uneconomic but California has insisted that carmakers begin offering 'zero emission' vehicles - in other words, electric cars - by 1998 if they are to sell other models in the state. Japanese manufacturers are also intensively investigating electric vehicle technology. GM, which for years has trumpeted plans to have its plastic-bodied Impact electric vehicle in commercial production by the mid-1990s, now appears to have quietly dropped that plan because of the severe financial pressures facing the group. GM said it would produce up to 50 electric vehicles next year which would be provided to utilities, local governments and others for technical feedback. However, GM has also reportedly told hourly workers who had expected to build the Impact of an indefinite delay in commercial production plans. Detroit's big three have co-operated increasingly in recent years - in areas ranging from vehicle research to political lobbying - as competition from Japanese manufacturers has intensified. Uscar is already looking at advanced battery technology for electric vehicles. The alliance unveiled on Friday goes beyond previous joint ventures into possible parts manufacturing. This might have caused anti-trust problems but the companies evidently believe the competitive threat from Japan will over-ride any monopolist concerns in the Clinton administration.
19930127000000000	FT  27 JAN 93 / Technology: Emission-free car shows its mettle. With the big three US car makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, ready to co-operate more closely on the development of an electric car, metal producers are watching developments with great interest, as electric vehicles promise big new markets for both lead and nickel. Inco, the Canadian group, reckons that by 2000 there will be 200,000 to 500,000 electric vehicles produced each year to meet legal requirements. Given the short time-scale of the tough emission laws in California, and with other states considering whether to follow, car makers see electric vehicles as the only available technology to give immediate pollution-free driving. To meet the challenge, the Advanced Lead-Acid Battery Consortium (Alabac) was formed in the US. Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry also has an electric vehicle battery programme. With tentative plans to keep conventional cars out of the polluted centres of European cities, Fiat of Italy and Peugeot of France estimate that by 2000 there will be a European market for 250,000 electric vehicles a year. For nickel producers, this means the search is being speeded up for better rechargeable batteries - to take vehicles further and faster, charge more quickly and need charging less frequently. Five different types (nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel-zinc, nickel-hydride and nickel-sulphur) are under study. Competition is mainly from standard lead-acid and more advanced batteries under development, such as sodium sulphur or lithium systems. Inco believes a new nickel market of 25m lbs to 60m lbs a year would be created; present nickel consumption in batteries is probably less than 22m lbs. Altogether, countries outside the former eastern bloc will consume about 1.5bn lbs of the metal this year. Lead-acid battery producers are also enthusiastic about electric vehicles. At the Alabac headquarters in Durham, North Carolina, experts reckon this type of battery offers the only affordable alternative to the internal combustion engine in vehicles. 'If society is to make a big impact on pollution from cars, a large number of people have to switch to electric or hybrid cars. And only electric cars with lead-acid batteries can be priced within reach of large numbers of the population,' says John Sharpe, an Alabac official. Alabac makes no estimates about future demand, but the potential for lead producers can be judged from the fact that today's conventional battery in a US car weighs between 60 and 70 lbs. Lead-acid battery packs in an electric vehicle would weigh between 600 and 800 lbs, while there would be about 400 lbs of batteries in a hybrid vehicle. Most of the weight is accounted for by the lead content. Today, about 5.5bn lbs of lead, or 60 per cent of that consumed, is used in batteries, of which about 1.1bn lbs is used in the production of new cars.
19930206000000000	FT  06 FEB 93 / Dollars 50m US plan for natural gas car: Shape of vehicles to come. A Dollars 50m development programme that could lead to the first US production of cars powered solely by natural gas has been launched jointly by Ford, a Californian utility and the Chicago-based Gas Research Institute. Another Dollars 23m (Pounds 15.2m) is being spent on a similar programme for vans and pick-up trucks. A fleet of 50 cars, adaptations of Ford's Crown Victoria model, are to undergo trials during a three-year evaluation programme in the US and Canada, during which several other utilities will also monitor the vehicles' operating costs, reliability and other data. Provided the cars are shown to have competitive operating costs and no reliability drawbacks, there is a potential market of many thousands of vehicles a year from the mid-1990s, as the federal Clean Air Act and individual state legislation clamp down on car exhaust emissions. Natural gas is potentially one of the cleanest 'alternative' fuels and it is claimed that initial tests of vehicles in the programme have shown emissions within California's requirement for ultra-low-emission cars, which starts in 1998. Under the Clean Air Act, federal and state governments are requiring fleets of 10 or more vehicles operating in the 22 most polluted US cities to begin phasing in very low emission cars, reaching 50 per cent of all fleet vehicles purchased by 1999. While there is already a sizeable market for converting cars to run on either petrol or natural gas, both in the US and Europe, the Ford vehicles will have engine and other components made to take full advantage of the fuel's emissions and energy characteristics. The Gas Research Institute and Southern California Gas are contributing Dollars 11.5m to the project, with SocCalGas providing the main fuelling infrastructure. It plans to open 51 refuelling stations by the end of this year, which will also cater to converted vehicles.
19930909000000000	FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of World Car Industry (26): Age of the city car is about to dawn - The Car of the Future. For most of us, the name Mercedes-Benz evokes images of large luxury cars. Yet one of the most significant potential trends for cars of the future is that Mercedes will unveil a concept car smaller than a Ford Fiesta at the Frankfurt motor show this week, and that the ideas it incorporates will provide the basis for a production Mercedes of the late 1990s. The age of the 'city' car - small, light, miserly on fuel or alternatively using electrical energy - appears to be about to dawn in Europe. The Twingo runabout from Renault, and the Polish-built Cinquecento from Fiat, have already given renewed momentum to the European market for very small cars - a market all but ignored during the economic boom years of the 1980s. (The sector is long-established in Japan, where there is a flourishing market for 'microcars' specifically designed for urban use.) Current cars, however, are equated with cheapness and utility. Mercedes' model, which in concept form is called the Vision A 93, should show, once and for all, whether the 'city' car concept can be satisfactorily taken 'up-market.' Rapidly increasing urban traffic congestion, concern about the pollution thus caused, and even the prospect of city centres being closed to all but electric cars or other very 'clean' alternatives have been driving factors behind the development of the 'Vision' - together with Mercedes' own acknowledged need to find commercially attractive new market sectors. But Mercedes is not alone. BMW has produced a three-seater prototype of its own, the Z13. Volkswagen will start production of its city car, the Chico, in 1995, and many other manufacturers have similar projects in development. BMW's Z13 is more obviously a 'city only' car than the Mercedes. It has been designed and developed mainly for driver-only operation; it is powered by a 1.1 litre motorcycle engine mounted at the rear with a continuously variable automatic transmission. The driver is seated centrally, with two full-sized seats for possible passengers set back slightly on either side. The Vision has been designed as a four-seater and is intended to be usable on longer journeys. With impact safety in mind, the engine - petrol, diesel or battery-powered electric - is located centrally under the passenger compartment. Importantly, Mercedes claims that the petrol and diesel engines would both qualify as 'ultra-low emissions vehicles' under California's draconian clean air regulations, and the electric version would qualify as a 'zero emissions vehicle' (ZEV). Starting in 1998, California will require 2 per cent of a manufacturer's total car sales to be of ZEVs, rising to 10 per cent by the year 2010, if the manufacturer wants to go on selling its vehicles in California's 1m-plus annual new car market. Both the BMW and the Mercedes models would have in common in their bodies the extensive use of aluminium, seeking the lightness needed for good fuel economy from small capacity power units, or in compensation for the weight of the air conditioning, mobile telephone, navigation system and fax - all considered as possible de rigeur fitments for cars towards the end of the 1990s. Not surprisingly, aluminium producers are watching these developments with the closest interest: it now looks increasingly likely that the material will have a much expanded use in the car of the future. Aluminium's attractions are obvious: it is extremely light and much easier and cheaper to shape than steel. On the other hand it is more easily damaged; it is more difficult to weld than steel; and it requires a great deal of energy to produce, so it is a good deal more expensive. In terms of total energy requirement, however, its exceptional capacity to be recycled works in its favour in the long term. Smaller, lighter engines, gearboxes, driveshafts and other mechanical components can be used. So far, aluminium has provided the main bodywork only for expensive, limited production cars such as Aston Martin or Honda's NSX sports car. But the next substantive move towards wider adoption by vehicle manufacturers is imminent, within the next few months, with the launch by Audi of its replacement for the V8 saloon and which will have an aluminium chassis. The car will mark the culmination of an ll-year collaborative project between Audi and Aluminium Company of America (Alcoa). It required not only the development of new alloys with the required crash protection properties, but also new production processes. The car will have a skeleton-like spaceframe made up of about 100 robotically welded pressings - about one third the number required in a steel-bodied car. The partners' faith in the future of aluminium for the motor industry is such that Alcoa has built a Dollars 70m facility at Soest, Germany, to make the spaceframes - and to offer its services to other vehicle makers. However, the material is not yet a candidate for cheaper, very high volume production cars; at present the process is cost-effective only for production runs of up to 100,000 cars a year. But the revival of interest is aluminium is causing a certain amount of wariness at some large chemical groups such as Dow and DuPont, which have large plastic composites interests. For much of the 1980s it appeared that plastic composites could emerge as stronger, non-rusting rivals to metal for the load bearing main structure of a car. Complexity and recycling difficulties make this a more distant prospect, although the use of plastics continues to increase steadily in other non-stress bearing applications. With or without aluminium, 'downsizing' of cars is occurring across most vehicle sectors as sophisticatedcomputer aided design and manufacturing systems allow much better packaging of mechanical components, thus leaving more room for occupants. Mercedes is even investigating ways of making its top-range 'S' class models appear smaller, following criticisms in some sections of the press that it seems too much of an environmentally-unfriendly leviathan.
19931222000000000	FT  22 DEC 93 / Survey of Environmental Management (9): California sets the agenda - Car makers are not yet persuaded that 'green' is good for business. Volkswagen, the car maker, keeps goldfish. They live, apparently healthy and content, in a big tank at Wolfsburg, one of Europe's largest car manufacturing plants. The water they swim in has been used in the paint plant, or in umpteen other processes before being recycled  - 'in-house' - back to cleanliness. The fish represent one of the giant German car maker's favourite illustrations of how it is managing its business with due regard for environmental considerations. Short of forming a subsidiary to sell goldfish and chips, VW in this case is nevertheless hard pushed to see the business opportunity and increased profitability which, legislators insist, should arise from sound environmental management. It is not all bad news. For example, the complex and expensive equipment which VW, General Motors and others in the motor industry have installed to collect gaseous solvents from a number of processes, and which in the past would have merely escaped into the atmosphere, does have some commercial payback. The gases can be used as a feedstock in on-site electricity generating plants, thus marginally reducing fuel bills. But in most aspects, and for the motor industry as a whole, environmental management means cost - and a lot of it. Few industries are exposed to environmental legislation and 'green' social pressures in so many forms. It is easy to see why. The motor industry is the world's single largest manufacturing activity, producing about 50m units a year of products, each containing at least 5,000 individual pieces of widely varying materials. It is a huge consumer of energy and raw materials in its production processes - and a prodigious generator, through those processes, of waste. But the products, too, are the target of environmental regulation and concern. The drive to curb exhaust emissions builds in cost and complexity from first concept on the computer to final assembly, as designers seek to accommodate increasingly more intricate catalytic converter systems and the plumbing and electronic management that goes with them. For companies such as Johnson Matthey (JM), involved in the supply of the precious metals-coated catalyst itself, there has indeed been a business opportunity as a result of Europe following North America into making 'cats' mandatory on all new cars from the start of 1993. It has meant the opening up of a whole new European market sector, for which JM fought vigorously in the 1980s propaganda wars between advocates of 'cats' and those of the seemingly rival 'lean-burn' technology (until it was realised that the technologies were in fact complementary). But for vehicle makers 'cats' have meant a significant on-cost which, though justified in environmental terms, has inevitably squeezed their profit margins in terms of how much can be passed on as higher prices to the public. Emissions-linked costs appear poised to escalate further. In North America, traditionally the leader in tightening the exhaust emissions screw, standards for 1994 will require a further 40 per cent cut in hydrocarbon emissions and a 60 per cent reduction in oxides of nitrogen compared with the previous standards. However, such big percentage cuts do not mean another big leap forward in reducing the amount of pollutants emitted compared with a car fitted with no catalyst at all. Even the relatively simple cats of five or more years ago removed 90 per cent of exhaust pollutants compared with a 'non-cat' car. The new standards are thus acting on the remaining few per cent - at what the motor industry insists, because of the technology now involved, is a similar cost to removing the initial 90 per cent. Again, the manufacturers know they cannot pass on these costs in full - or that if they did so collectively (quite apart from anti-trust considerations), higher absolute prices would reduce the size of new car markets and lead to an older - and 'dirtier' - car population as motorists hung on to their vehicles for longer. Not surprisingly, the industry's own, fruitless urging has been that the biggest immediate impact on exhaust pollution could be made by government sweeping the older car population from the streets, and perhaps providing fiscal incentives for the purchase of new ones. Instead, California has pointed the way towards yet more draconian emissions standards - and thrown another huge burden on the world's motor industry - by insisting that 2 per cent of a car maker's sales in the state must be of 'zero emission vehicles' (ZEVs) starting in 1998, rising to 10 per cent in the early 21st century, as well as requiring populations of ULEVs (ultra-low emission vehicles). Given the propensity for other US states and, eventually, other continents such as Europe to emulate California, the intended California standards are being taken seriously - not least because state legislators say non-complying manufacturers would be excluded from the Californian market altogether. Most manufacturers have interpreted the ZEV as necessarily being powered electrically - by batteries - with the exception of a few exploring hydrogen power. Thus a huge research effort into viable electric cars has been going on for the past several years. In one example of the effort, the North American 'big three' car makers, GM, Ford and Chrysler, are participants in a federal government-backed consortium spending Dollars 1.2bn in search of new batteries which might overcome the power and mileage limitations of existing types. GM is building a fleet of 50 prototypes of a car called the Impact, made mainly out of aluminium, in the hope that an electric car can be made at least faintly competitive with a petrol counterpart. But deep scepticism exists. And in terms of business opportunity the prize is not the creation of an important new market, but at best a partial substitute for the old.
19940101000000000	FT  01 JAN 94 / Motoring: Where on earth is my electric car? - Motoring around town in a battery-driven vehicle will just have to remain a dream for this year. Like many people who live in town, perhaps you would like an electric car. Noiseless, non-polluting, and almost as friendly to the environment as a bicycle. Ridiculously cheap to run, too. Instead of pouring costly petrol down its gullet, you would just plug it into the mains overnight and recharge its batteries on a few pence worth of off-peak electricity. How nice if this town motorist's dream came true in 1994. Alas, it will not. This does not mean the car-makers are not interested in making electric cars powered by batteries. They have all been at it for years, investing millions. And do not run away with the idea that there is some kind of oil industry conspiracy to stifle it at birth. Electric cars are as old as motoring - they have been around for 100 years. Early this century, there were fleets of electric buses and taxis in European cities. And battery-driven cars were quite popular in the US among motorists who hated swinging a crank handle to start the engine. Then, the electric self-starter was invented and the battery car took a back seat overnight. The trouble with electric vehicles is that the conventional storage battery is an inefficient form of propulsion, to say the least. Weight for weight, petrol contains 230 times more energy than the best kind of nickel-cadmium traction battery. The cheaper lead-acid type, used in every petrol or diesel car for starting purposes, is even worse. A battery is not a power source; it merely stores electricity generated elsewhere. A battery car creates no pollution itself - that comes from burning oil, gas or (especially) coal to generate the electricity on which it runs. To be truly 'green,' a battery car must be re-charged with electricity generated by water, solar, geo-thermal, wind or atomic power. But the first four are hardly relevant in Britain, and we all know what the environment lobby thinks about anything nuclear. So, it can be argued that the whole concept of the battery car as completely friendly to the environment is flawed. Yet, you cannot get away from the fact that it does not pollute the urban areas, where it operates without exhaust emissions or noise. Because the battery car's range is so limited - about 60 miles (100km) is a realistic average before it needs an eight-hour re-charge - it must, by definition, be a household's second car. And because production so far has been tiny, an electric car costs at least twice as much to make as one with a small petrol engine. Another snag is that because the batteries take up so much more space than a petrol tank, electric versions of small four-seat cars may end up as two-seaters. France, which produces nearly all its electricity in emission-free nuclear power stations, has gone further with battery cars than any other European country. PSA (Peugeot-Citroen) and Renault are running large-scale trials in co-operation with Electricite de France (EDF). In 22 towns, from Bordeaux to Avignon, Strasbourg to Douai, battery re-charging stations are to be set up at the roadside and in public or private car parks. These will give electric cars (based on models such as the Peugeot 106, Citroen AX and Renault Clio) a quick, range-extending fix of current during the day. A battery hire system will be put in place because a set representing perhaps one-third of the value of the car might last only three years. Renting batteries could be more sensible than buying. What, though, about high-tech miracle batteries that are claimed to be many times more efficient than today's conventional kind? They are trundled out often by publicity-seeking manufacturers - but people with their feet on the ground should forget them, at any rate for years to come. They work in laboratories or under controlled test conditions but are not (and may never be) cheap, or even safe, enough for public use. Many believe the best hope for the battery-electric car is legislation banning vehicles with petrol or diesel engines from the most congested city centres. If that happened, and the only alternative to driving a battery car or hailing a battery-driven taxi was walking, then the goalposts really would be moved. We might see a variation of the park-and-ride scheme. Instead of leaving your car on the outskirts of town and catching a bus, tram or train, you would pick up a rental battery car and drive to your office or the shops in a no-go area for internal combustion engines. Another scenario involves the hybrid car. This offers the best of both worlds; battery power for town driving, petrol or diesel for the open road. Battery-driven, its performance and range would be modest but enough for driving a few hours on 30mph (50kph) speed-limited roads. Out of town, it would go more like a normal car with a small, low-emission engine running at a constant speed and coupled to a generator. This would feed current via the batteries to an electric motor driving the wheels. The idea is not new and most major car-makers have produced experimental hybrids. One of the latest and most interesting is the Volvo ECC (for environmental concept car) which was unveiled about a year ago. It has a tiny gas turbine, running on diesel fuel and driving a lightweight generator at very high speed. Even though one-fifth of the ECC's weight is batteries, it is not a particularly heavy car and is shaped aerodynamically. Volvo, which is developing the ECC with its partner, Renault, says it has a top speed of 108mph (175kph) and would go 416 miles (670km) on a tankful if you did not exceed 56mph (90kph). Battery power alone would take it only a fraction of that distance at a lower speed. Do not put off buying a new car because you would like a battery-electric to use in town or a hybrid for all kinds of motoring. They are still some years off. Renault thinks it could be 2015 before electric cars represent 10 per cent of the total market and 40 per cent of cars used in town. California, which invented smog created by car exhausts, has bitten on the bullet. State regulations stipulate that, by 1998, at least 2 per cent of new cars on sale must be zero emission (in other words, electric) vehicles. The quota will go up to 5 per cent by 2003 and 10 per cent by 2005. Seventeen other states have either followed California's lead or have said they will. It looks like a bold move. But, as one Los Angeles car dealer said: 'They can make me put electric cars in my showroom - but they can't make people buy them if they don't want to.'
19940414000000000	FT  14 APR 94 / Germans build electric van. Daimler-Benz, Germany's largest industrial group, yesterday unveiled an experimental hydrogen-powered electric van which runs on fuel cells, converting chemicals directly into electricity without the need to burn fossil fuels. Daimler-Benz is among several companies in Japan, the US and elsewhere working on fuel cell technology for transport and power generation. In the production of the van, Daimler-Benz co-operated with Ballard Power Systems of Canada, which developed a fuel-cell bus operating in Vancouver. This technology utilises highly efficient electricity production without noxious exhaust gasses and with less carbon dioxide than conventional engines. The equipment is still too heavy and the cost too high for fuel cells to enter commercial use yet. Mr Firoz Rasul, president of Ballard, said it would take less than 10 years for the problems to be resolved, adding that California's tough new emission laws would act as an important spur to fuel cell technology.
19940415000000000	FT  15 APR 94 / Technology: Milestone on the road - Fuel cells are set to become the power source of the future. They have been used in space travel and on the moon, in submarines and small power stations. Invented more than 150 years ago, they have recently been heralded as an answer to some of the world's most severe environmental problems and as the power-generating technology of the future. So why have fuel cells - which produce electricity without serious pollution of the atmosphere - remained mostly in the laboratory and failed to make any impact on the commercial market? The answer lies not so much in the technology itself as in the cost of the process and the cumbersome nature of the equipment needed. Yet this week, in its austere white research headquarters near Ulm in south Germany, Daimler-Benz demonstrated that it was well on the way to solving these problems. Germany's largest industrial concern showed off a white van packed full of pipes, valves and cables and with a big yellow cylinder for the hydrogen used to produce energy by reacting with oxygen from the air. Daimler-Benz's chairman, Edzard Reuter, keen to show that the industrial group's expensive diversification into electronics, aerospace and other non-motor sectors was producing results, spoke enthusiastically of a 'milestone on the road to ecological mobility'. Hartmut Weule, research and technology director, said: 'We are at the very beginning of a new phase of technology, comparable with the days when Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz were constructing their first vehicles powered by internal combustion engines.' But Weule was careful not to get carried away by this grand historical analogy. Much work remained to be done before fuel cell vehicles could be brought to the series production stage, he said. Daimler was also working to perfect further the internal combustion and diesel engines on which the fortunes of its Mercedes-Benz car and truck subsidiary still depend. Weule left no doubt, however, of Daimler's determination to succeed in the technology of fuel cells, in which the group says it is ahead of automotive rivals such as General Motors of the US and Mazda of Japan. 'We do not intend to wait until our Japanese or American competitors gain the upper hand in technology,' he said. Already, the group - including AEG (electronics and energy generation), Dornier (aerospace and materials) and Deutsche Aerospace - has spent more than DM100m (Pounds 40m) on research into fuel cell technology. The electric transporter van, shown off for the first time in Ulm on Wednesday, certainly does not look revolutionary. Inside, though, it contains the elements of a technological advance which enables Daimler to claim that it is the first motor company in Europe, and probably the world, to develop a fully working vehicle powered by fuel cells. Called Necar (new electric car), it has a more efficient propulsion system than any other type used in the industry while producing no harmful exhaust gases and far less carbon dioxide than emitted by conventional engines. The energy conversion efficiency achieved by Daimler is up to 30 per cent compared with up to 20 per cent in internal combustion engines. Fuel cells, which work at low temperatures and do not rely on the burning of fossil fuels, produce no oxides of nitrogen or sulphur (the causes of acid rain), need no batteries which would have to be recharged or recycled and can obtain hydrogen from such different fuels as natural gas, methanol, biomass gas, methane and other gases. With all these advantages, it is not surprising that research into fuel cells is taken seriously in the US and Japan, both of which have costly national programmes aimed at making the technology viable for transport and power generation. A German project group, including Daimler, Siemens, the electrical and electronics group, the chemical industry and the federal research ministry, has just been set up to keep the country in the forefront of fuel cell developments. Weule would also like to see greater interest at European Union level - 'they should be more active in Brussels'. To develop its fuel cell-powered vehicle, Daimler went into partnership with Ballard Power Systems, a Canadian specialist in this technology. Ballard has installed fuel cells in a bus in Vancouver and is working to extend its range and reduce its weight. Firoz Rasul, Ballard's president, is in no doubt that Daimler has taken fuel cell technology a considerable way towards commercial viability, despite the remaining problems. 'This demonstration shows that it's here, it's real and the trick is to get the cost down.' Cost and weight are the big hurdles still to be overcome. Weule reckons the present cost of some DM10,000 for each kW of electricity needs to come down by a factor of at least 50, to around DM200 or less, before fuel cells can be installed in vehicles for private customers. This could take 10 or 20 years. Rasul, speaking from close knowledge of California's tough new pollution laws, which stipulate 10 per cent of cars should be zero-emission producing in 2003, is more optimistic. 'I would say less than 10 years.' Rasul believes industry and governments are now waking up to fuel cells' potential. 'The market is pushing it now and there is a new interest from the auto players.' Ballard's contribution to the Daimler vehicle was the proton exchange membrane fuel cell, a thin polymer foil coated with a catalyst material containing platinum; this encourages hydrogen to ionise and react with oxygen to produce the electricity. Weule says Daimler's electric vehicle will in future use widely available methanol to obtain the hydrogen instead of a pressurised gas cylinder. In a few years' time, Daimler aims to develop a fuel cell drive system far smaller than that in its Necar. Success would be a further step towards fulfilling Weule's belief that fuel cells will be 'the propulsion technology of the next century'. FT  15 APR 94 / Technology: Getting there by fuel cell. Just over 10 years ago, Ballard Power Systems took a second look at an all but abandoned technology. Now the Canadian company which is working with Daimler-Benz appears on the verge of a breakthrough in the efficient use of clean, abundant energy from fuel cells. It has attracted attention with the improvements it has made to a proton exchange membrane fuel cell pioneered by General Electric of the US. Paul Howard, Ballard's vice-president, says the GE system (developed for the space programme) had been seen as too heavy, finicky and expensive. But in 1983, Ballard received a Canadian military contract for the fuel cells which produce electricity directly from oxygen and hydrogen without combustion. They work with a polymer membrane as the electrolyte between two thin layers of platinum catalyst. These are sandwiched between two carbon electrodes. When hydrogen is piped next to one electrode and oxygen next to the other, a reaction occurs in the electrolyte, producing the electricity, heat and water. Ballard improved the GE technology and by 1987 was ready to produce its first-generation 5 kW fuel cell, a series of electrodes, catalysts and plastic membranes bolted together, weighing 50 kg. An array of 24 similar cells, linked to an electric motor, powers its first test vehicle, a bus. This first generation of fuel cells has been sold to motor companies, including Daimler-Benz, for evaluation. The next cells will generate more than twice as much power. In 1998, Ballard, working with Johnson Matthey of the UK to reduce the amount of platinum catalyst, plans to market the third and commercially viable phase. The 25 kW fuel cells will drive a large bus with a range of 560 km. A fourth generation 50 kW cell is at least 10 years away. 'We need to get to the power-to-weight ratio of an internal combustion engine. Today, we're probably about five or 10 times away from that,' says Howard. 'Automobiles in the future are going to be driven by fuel cells. Batteries aren't going to get there.'
19940727000000000	FT  27 JUL 94 / Ford joins 'hybrid' electric car project. Ford is joining seven US-based advanced technology companies in a five-year, Dollars 122m programme to develop prototype 'hybrid' electric vehicles. Such vehicles are seen as possibly the best available compromise between the need to reduce exhaust emissions, best achieved by electrically powered vehicles, and the severely restricted range offered by battery cars using current technology . Half the funds for the project are to be provided by the US energy department. 'Hybrids' contain two power units; one, typically a small petrol engine, runs at a constant speed to generate electrical energy which is either stored in battery packs for electric-only operation in cities or converted by the second motor directly into mechanical energy for use on highways. Ford said last night the project aimed to investigate methods of using alternative fuels as well as increasing fuel economy and reducing emissions. Ford's partners in the project include GE's research and development centre, which will explore energy storage in the vehicles; and Minneapolis-based Onan Corporation, one of the world's largest producers of mobile power generation systems. The project comes against a background of increasing hostility by the North American motor industry towards stringent anti-pollution standards being introduced in California. These require carmakers to have at least 2 per cent of their sales made up of 'zero-emission' (battery-powered) cars from 1998.
19940729000000000	FT  29 JUL 94 / 'Electrobus' hits the road in fight to cut pollution. A commercial bus operator yesterday started trials of electric 'hybrid' buses which emit much less exhaust pollution than conventional buses - but which cost two-and-a-half times as much to buy. Exeter-based Transit Holdings has paid Pounds 100,000 for each of the two Electrobus 18-seat vehicles which are taking to the streets of Torquay, Devon, making Iveco Ford the first manufacturer to supply such buses for regular operation in the UK. Mr Harry Blundred, Transit's chairman, said the company, which operates 750 buses in the West Country and Oxfordshire, would assess the reliability and operating costs of the buses before deciding whether to expand the hybrid fleet. A decision would almost certainly be made within a year. The buses are powered primarily by a one-litre Fiat Uno car petrol engine which is pre-set to run quietly at a fuel-efficient speed. This engine, which is fitted with a catalytic converter, drives an electrical generator which in turn provides current to an electric motor driving the wheels. The generator also charges storage batteries so that the electric motor can be fed extra power, such as when it is climbing a hill. The bus is capable of operating on its batteries, with the petrol engine switched off, for 20 minutes in every hour. Because it recharges its batteries on the move, it is not subject to the severe range restrictions of wholly battery-powered vehicles. Howver, its complexity means that the hybrid costs Pounds 100,000, compared with less than Pounds 40,000 for the conventional diesel-powered Iveco Daily buses on which the hybrids are based. But Mr Blundred said he believed that the price could come down to Pounds 70,000 if the buses were produced in volume, and that over a lifespan of at least 10 years their operating costs might prove to be only 10 per cent to 20 per cent more than the diesel versions. About 30 of the buses have gone into service in Italy. Because of the higher costs Transit envisaged the vehicles being used only on town and city-centre routes, where the need to reduce exhaust pollution was greatest. Mr Blundred said that if operating costs were higher than hoped, support might be be needed from the European Commission to establish viable fleets of the buses.
19940817000000000	FT  17 AUG 94 / Business and the Environment: Sparks fly over electric cars  -Battery-operated vehicles may not be as clean as originally thought. While the US automobile industry scrambles to meet 1998 deadlines to put electric vehicles on the market, controversy about the environmental benefits and commercial viability of battery-operated cars is mounting. Circumstances in the US increasingly favour the electric car. Air quality laws in California and Massachusetts now demand that 'zero-emission' vehicles comprise 2 per cent of total sales in the car market by 1998. Electric cars are the only vehicles to meet such standards so far. Other states are considering similar laws. Yet the big three car manufacturers - Ford, Chrysler and General Motors - have complained bitterly during the last few months that a deadline of 1998 is unrealistic and that environmental benefits from the vehicles are ill-defined. Several environmental organisations have concurred. In April, a leaked report by the US Environmental Protection Agency questioned the air quality improvements from battery-operated cars, lending credence to electric car critics. 'Electric vehicles will not have a positive environmental benefit across the country,' says Stephen Burrington, a lawyer with environmental advocacy group the Conservation Law Foundation. Many ecologists complain that the term 'zero-emission' vehicle is wishful thinking when applied to electric cars. The emissions are still there, they argue, whether they emanate from the electric power plant or from the car itself. According to the EPA report, switching to electric vehicles may not always improve air quality as these cars increase electricity consumption. Benefits are, therefore, uneven. Regions relying on 'cleaner' electricity sources, such as nuclear and hydro-electric plants and natural gas, for their energy will probably fare better than regions depending on more traditional power sources such as oil and coal. 'The switch to electric vehicles could be disastrous for a state like Kentucky, which still gets a lot of its electricity from coal,' says Robert Russell, a lawyer for the Conservation Law Foundation. Most people involved in the debate agree that electric car use in California would almost certainly improve air quality there. 'California is an exception, first because it has so many clean energy sources such as wind power, and second because its electricity sources are separated by mountains from the cities which have air quality problems, like Los Angeles,' says Reginald Modlin, Chrysler's manager of environmental energy affairs. There the consensus stops. The EPA and NESCAUM, the north-eastern air quality organisation, believe the north-east of the country, which generates much of its energy through nuclear power, could also benefit from electric vehicles. The car industry disagrees. 'Our studies show that the north-east would not get any improvement in air quality with a switch to electric vehicles,' says Modlin. John Williams, chairman of the US Advanced Battery Consortium at General Motors, also points out that electric cars are less efficient in the north-east than they are in California. 'The cold in the north-east hurts our range,' he explains. 'We can get 70-90 miles in moderate temperatures, but only 30 miles in freezing conditions.' Enthusiasts say that studies questioning environmental benefits assume a lower efficiency than they should for electric cars. 'Old gas-burning cars normally see a dramatic increase in emissions as they get older,' says William Sessa, a spokesman for the California Air Resources Board. 'Electric cars don't see this deterioration. After 100,000 miles of driving, they are pretty much the same as brand new in terms of emissions.' Some environmentalists believe electric vehicle efficiency is over-estimated. 'Getting the energy from the power source to storage, from the storage to the car, is extremely inefficient,' says Burrington. Environmental improvements may largely depend on how strictly emissions from electricity sources are controlled. California's rigid pollution standards mean that it would reap more benefits than other states. In the long run, moreover, it may be easier to limit pollution from the electric plants than from individual cars. Emissions, however, are only part of the overall impact, say environmentalists. 'Even if the sources are cleaner, if electric use increases, it can cause ecological problems,' says Thomas Caffrey, an engineer with the EPA. 'There are other environmental problems involved with sources like hydro-electric and nuclear. Hydro-electric power has been very much criticised lately for what it can do to fish and other water species.' Russell contends, moreover, that the issue cannot be studied on a region-to-region basis. 'Cars are marketed widely and cross state boundaries readily, so we need to look at this on a federal level.' Environmentalists also worry that electric cars will encourage Americans to be complacent about their driving habits. 'What we need is an overall reduction in car use in this country,' says Burrington. Despite the criticism, electric cars seem poised to represent part of the car market by 1998. Car manufacturers say they can meet the state-imposed deadlines, although battery technology cannot yet offer the vehicles at competitive prices. The air-quality boards for California and the north-eastern states say they will forge ahead with plans to encourage electric car use. 'With the smog problems we face in California, we have no choice,' says Sessa. 'We have to look at alternatives like electric vehicles. They may not be perfect, but they're certainly an improvement over what we have.'
19941004000000000	FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (29): Short on speed and range  -A look at prospects for the electric car. After 100 years of being 'just around the corner', the electric car is coming into sight. But it is low on power, short of range, expensive to make and is being pushed and pulled along by environmental legislators and grumbling carmakers. Were it not for Californian state clean-air legislation requiring 2 per cent of each manufacturer's sales to be of zero-emission vehicles (Zevs) from 1998, it is unlikely that the battery-powered car - currently seen as the only way of achieving zero emissions in urban areas - would be a candidate for volume production this century, certainly in North America. Americans pay little for petrol and the economic incentive towards electric cars is zero. Even in Europe and Japan, where growing urban air quality problems and much higher fuel prices create a more viable climate for 'EVs' (electric vehicles), progress is slow and disappointing for their proponents. Despite intensive research and expenditure of many hundreds of millions of dollars, the search for a 'superbattery' capable of giving an 'EV' anything remotely like the speed and range of a petrol car has so far failed. There are a few promising alternatives to lead-acid types, but most have disadvantages. Thus when the first flocks of battery cars do roll out of Californian showrooms in less than four years, the certainty is that their high cost will be subsidised in part by the conventional cars their manufacturers sell in much larger numbers. And the drivers who have bought them will have made knowing sacrifices of finance and flexibility as the price of cleaner Los Angeles air - for range restrictions rule out EVs as 'only' cars for far-ranging Americans. But roll out the 'Zevs' will, except in the now-highly unlikely event of the Californian Air Resources Board (Carb) and other state legislators being won over, at the 11th hour, by the motor industry's fervent arguments that a truly viable Zev is not technically achievable by 1998. Such arguments have been falling on deaf Carb ears for the past several years, and other states such as Massachusetts have been lining up to impose similar legislation. And the '2 per cent' rule is just the start; the legislation requires 10 per cent of sales, or at least 100,000 in California's 1m-plus new car market, to be of Zevs by early next century . Manufacturers have had no choice but to start developing such cars, for the threatened penalty of non-compliance is exclusion from California's and some other states' markets. Certainly the motor industry has little hope of a reprieve through the still-rumbling debate about whether battery cars are really as clean as they are made out to be. As a number of reports in both the US and Europe have pointed out, the electric power stored in an EV's battery has to be generated somehow. And whether it is produced from coal, oil, natural gas, hydro or nuclear energy will have a big effect on the overall environmental impact of a battery-powered car population. It is typical of the unfulfilled promise of even the biggest car makers' electric vehicle plans that as far back as the early 1980s General Motors was promising 100,000-plus output of small electric cars before the end of that decade. They never materialised, defeated largely by inadequate battery technology. Nor did promised vehicles from Ford. Now GM has the Impact, perhaps the most-trumpeted electric car programme of all, and trials of which are just getting under way in Los Angeles. In 1991, GM's electric vehicle programme directors implied, if not specifically stated, that cars based on the 100mph-plus, purpose-built and aluminium-bodied Impact would be rolling out of a former Buick plant at Lansing, Michigan, well before the 1998 deadline. Even though a fleet of 30 has now been produced under a Dollars 32m 'PrEView' programme which will see 1,000 drivers evaluate cars and charging apparatus over the next two years, the Impact project appears to have lost GM's earlier go-it-alone enthusiasm. The world's biggest vehicle maker is now collaborating with both Ford and Chrysler in pursuit of the viable EV. One ray of hope on the battery front is a joint venture GM and several other car makers, including Hyundai of Korea, have signed with the Ovonic battery company of the US, to produce batteries using nickel-hydride. In the case of the Impact, says GM, it is believed the Ovonic battery could double the Impact's 70-mile city driving range using lead-acid bateries. Even this project falls within a wider US collaborative framework. GM, Ford, Chrysler, electric utilities and government agencies, formed several years ago into the Advanced Battary Consortium, have awarded research and development contracts to five other battery makers pursuing alternative technologies. The search for viable battery cars for California has already had its casualties. At least one City of Los Angeles-backed electric car project has run out of funds. Meanwhile, Ford and several European companies are among those arguing that ultra-low (but not zero) emissions 'hybrid' cars should be considered as an effective compromoise. They would use a very small petrol or diesel engine running at constant speed to keep batteries charged when running on open highways (thus overcoming the range problem) but switching to battery-only operation in urban areas. That debate, too, rumbles on both in North America and in Europe, where there is considerable interest in the activities of Peugeot, a lonely voice predicting that Europe could have a 200,000-plus market for electric cars by the end of the decade. Peugeot says it plans soon to produce electric cars at an initial rate of 5,000 a year. And more than 20 French towns are being equipped with a basic infrastructure to recharge them. The rest of Europe, far less reliant on nuclear energy, appears content to stand and watch. Just how much progress is really being made should become more evident in California in December. It is then that an important electric vehicle symposium will take place with Ford, Chrysler, BMW, Mercedes and all others with a stake in the wealthy Californian market putting their EV wares on display. The symposium will take place in Anaheim. . . more specifically, at Disneyland. . .
19941005000000000	FT  05 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: Power to the petrol - John Griffiths finds battery cars cannot keep up. In 2015, most cars will still be powered by conventional petrol or diesel engines, with battery-powered cars and alternative fuels relegated to the 'politically correct fringe', according to a research report from The Economist Intelligence Unit. It also takes a strongly pessimistic view of the prospects for hydrogen-powered cars, on which several leading manufacturers are working as one of the most promising alternatives to battery vehicles in the search for environmentally 'clean' private transport. The 200-page study* appears to reinforce the arguments of the US 'big three' car makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, that electric vehicle technology is not sufficiently advanced for viable battery cars to go on sale in California in 1998 in line with state environmental legislation. Under directives drawn up by the Californian Air Resources Board (Carb), and which are being copied by some other US states, 2 per cent of a car maker's Californian sales must be zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs) in 1998, rising to 10 per cent by 2007. The penalty for non-compliance could be exclusion from the Californian new car market, which with well over 1m sales a year is bigger than that of many countries. No mainstream car maker could contemplate such a prospect, so all are developing electric cars to meet the deadline, despite reservations about their cost and whether they will have adequate range for the sprawling greater Los Angeles area, where California's air pollution problems are concentrated. The EIU report concentrates on what it describes as the 'extreme inefficiency' of batteries as a means of storing energy, maintaining that 150 conventional lead acid batteries, weighing several tonnes, would be needed to store the equivalent energy of a tankful of petrol. Even the most advanced forms of battery now at the research and development stage would only improve the situation by a factor of three, according to the report. 'But each of these batteries also suffers from technical problems of one kind or another, as well as from very high cost.' However, despite many months of lobbying by the motor industry, Carb and other states' clean-air authorities are showing little inclination to dilute or delay their legislation. And with no hydrogen-fuelled or other alternative zero-emissions vehicle on the immediate horizon, the Carb directive is effectively ordering manufacturers to produce battery-powered cars or EVs (electric vehicles). However, it cannot order motorists to buy them at prices which - unsubsidised - could be double that of a conventional family car. So most initial production will go to concerns such as power-generating utilities with a vested interest in the vehicles' long-term success. Sales to private motorists will have to be subsidised by the conventional cars their makers sell in much larger numbers. General Motors is providing the most visible evidence that electric cars will be available from 1998. It has just finished building a fleet of 30 models based on the Impact, a prototype unveiled about three years ago. The fleet is starting trials, under a programme called PrEView, in Los Angeles and will be evaluated, along with prototype systems for recharging the vehicles, by 1,000 drivers of widely varying types and needs over the next two years. Ken Baker, vice-president of GM's research and development centre, insists that 'GM wants electric vehicles to be a marketplace success. The PrEView drive will help us understand the potential EV customer and help take us one step closer to making EVs a reality.' All other problems such as cost apart, the programme should go a long way towards establishing whether the cars' estimated average range of 70 miles using lead acid batteries - rather than the more advanced, costly and commercially not yet available nickel cadmium ones of the prototype - really is of any practical use to most Los Angelinos. *New Generation Engines. Economist Intelligence Unit, 15 Regent Street, London SW1Y 4LR. Pounds 495.
19941008000000000	FT  08 OCT 94 / Motoring: Future takes the stand, but will it hit the road? / A look at all the prototypes, dotty and practical, at the Paris motor show. What is the star of the Paris Mondial de l'automobile that opened this week? Is it an exciting but dotty Renault Espace incorporating a lot of Formula 1 racing car parts and claimed to be the world's fastest four-seater? Or is it Xanae, a concept car described by its builder, Citroen, as 'a house on wheels'? The 186 mph / 300 kph Espace F1 has a mid-mounted Renault V10 engine from the 1992 and 1993 World Championship winners, a semi-automatic six-speed gearbox and Williams racing car rear suspension. Renault says, tongue in cheek, that this first F1 four-seater offers a 'never to be forgotten motoring sensation'. I am sure it does on a race track. One hopes that no one is ever tempted to stretch its legs on a public road. Unlike so many concept cars which burst upon the motor show scene like comets and then disappear just as quickly, Citroen's Xanae (you say Zan-eye-eh) is a practical running prototype. It has the same chassis platform, 2.0-litre, 16-valve petrol engine and automatic transmission as a Citroen Xantia. The suspension incorporates the active roll limitation system that impressed me so much when I tried it a few weeks ago (this column, 24 September). If the mechanicals are more conventional than state of the art, the body bristles with bright ideas. Although at 423 cm (almost 14 ft) overall the Xanae is shorter than a Xantia and only a little longer than a ZX, up to five people find it spectacularly roomy inside. The floor is completely flat and the body pillarless. When a front door and rear-hinged back door are opened, nothing obstructs people getting in and out. The minor controls are in a height-adjustable cluster on the steering column. A windscreen as steeply slanted as that of a French TGV train extends into a transparent roof panel. Xanae would not, as one might suppose, become insufferably hot on a sunny day because the glass is heat reflective and air conditioning is standard. Citroen side-steps questions on whether Xanae will evolve into a production vehicle, saying it was created to test public reaction to new vehicle concepts. Elsewhere in the show there are four MPVs (multi-purpose vehicles), jointly developed with Fiat and made by PSA (Peugeot-Citroen Group). These MPVs are sold, badged as Citroens, Fiats, Peugeots and Lancias, as 'monobox' alternatives to normal large estate cars. In three or four years, I could see a car based on Xanae fitting nicely into the PSA product range below these MPVs and above the Citroen Xantia and Peugeot 306. The only obvious drawback to Xanae is an intimidatingly high sill that would put the roomy but deep boot out of bounds to anyone who has a bad back - or is afraid of getting one. Ford is also showing a concept car based on an up to seven-seat MPV it has jointly developed with Volkswagen and which goes on sale next Spring. Zero emission vehicles are due to appear soon in Californian showrooms to satisfy environmental protection legislation. Things have not gone that far in Europe. But even here the battery-electric car is moving from the impractical novelty stage into small-scale production. It will, though, be some time before they are sold in dealerships alongside petrol and diesel cars. At the Paris show, Peugeot has unveiled Ion, a 3.32 metre (130.7 inch) long, four-seat battery-electric concept it thinks might be the ideal urban runabout of 2000. Like the Peugeot 106 and Citroen AX electric cars now being evaluated on a large scale in France, Ion has a nickel-cadmium battery pack giving it a range of up to 150 km (93 miles). Peugeot says Ion is only an exploratory project, but concedes that some of its interior and exterior styling ideas will be incorporated in a future town car. Britons may get a chance of seeing Peugeot's Ion at the UK's International Motor Show in Birmingham later this month. Among cars being unveiled to the public at Paris are a stunning Alfa Romeo GTV Spider (successor to the car immortalised by Dustin Hoffman in The Graduate) and the new Jaguar XJ saloons and their high-off-the-ground, four-wheel driven counterparts, the luxurious new Range Rovers. Aston Martin has the first of its ravishing DB7s due to be delivered to a French buyer as the centerpiece of its stand. Nissan and Honda are making a splash with their new QX 2.0-litre and 3.0-litre V6-engined executive saloons and Civic five-door hatchbacks respectively. Ford's odd looking Scorpio replacement is there, as are two desirable Porsches - a new 911 Carrera 4 with all-wheel drive and a rear-wheel drive 911 with gear selection for its Tiptronic transmission by thumb button on the steering wheel. Mondial de l'Automobile at the Porte de Versailles exhibition complex is open until 16 October.
19941011000000000	FT  11 OCT 94 / Technology: Charged up for zero emissions - AEG's plans for high-performance batteries for electric cars. In an upstairs room in AEG's Berlin works in Sickingenstrasse, a trainee robot is making a hash of inserting a strip of metal into a stainless steel tube. Its minder frowns, tweaks a button, makes a note. The automaton tries again, misses, and bends the strip into an elegant 'J'. It is one of a dozen or so in the early stages of programming for a venture into high-performance battery manufacture, which the loss-making Daimler-Benz subsidiary hopes will give it a charge of profitability in the budding market for electrically-powered passenger cars. The robot stands at the front of a fully-automated, DM20m (Pounds 8.1m) pilot assembly line producing sodium/nickel chloride cells for assembly into batteries weighing up to 300kg. AEG claims it is the first company in the world to start series manufacture of high-performance batteries. Despite widespread scepticism about the weight, efficiency and high prices of electric drive technology for road vehicles - a 300kg battery is expected to cost DM15,000 - it plans to stay ahead of the rest. The intention is to build a full-scale plant to make 15,000 so-called Zebra batteries a year, opening in 1998. Zebra - zero emission batteries research activity - is the first fruit of a joint venture dating back to 1988 between AEG and the South African Anglo American Group, which owns the technology patents. The initial aim of the project was to produce power sources for fork-lifts, diesel-electric vehicles and stationary units, but the project has gained momentum following Californian legislation that insists that as of 1998, at least 2 per cent of car makers' sales in the state must be zero-emission vehicles. At current registration levels, that represents 20,000 cars a year. The quota is scheduled to rise to 10 per cent by 2003. Test results and support from vehicle makers have also been encouraging. On a weight-for-weight basis, AEG says the batteries deliver up to four times more power than conventional lead-acid units. In tests on the flat Baltic island of Rugen, its power packs have proved capable of providing up to 150km range between charges. Considering that they have been tested in conventional heavy car bodies, AEG feels this is pretty good. It claims that vehicle manufacturers agree, noting that of the 60 test cars of various makes scooting silently around Rugen, 31 are fitted with Zebra power packs. Trials also show that the batteries can be recharged up to 1,500 times - exceeding the vehicle makers' minimum requirement of 1,000 - and are good for more than 100,000km. In its own modest way, the Zebra project contributes to Daimler-Benz's tarnished ambition of becoming an integrated technology group, drawing together skills and technologies from disparate sectors of the concern. The batteries' metal parts and pressings come mainly from Mercedes-Benz. The core element - a special aluminium hydroxide ceramic electrolyte - is made by a group subsidiary in the UK. Assembly techniques for such materials are a particular speciality of the Sickingenstrasse works, which manufactures more workaday filled-ceramic products such as capa-citors for fluorescent light fittings. Customers for the pilot plant's output of 450 batteries a year include Adam Opel, BMW, Toyota and, naturally, Mercedes-Benz, AEG's more successful sister company, although none has yet ordered commercial-scale deliveries.
19941207000000000	FT  07 DEC 94 / Business and the Environment: Hybrid car sets out. Hydro-Quebec, one of Canada's two biggest power utilities, has developed a hybrid electric car technology that it says will reduce emissions and increase energy efficiency. Hydro, best known for long-distance power transmission, electro-chemical and battery research, has unveiled its Couture Powertrain system, which runs on electric batteries backed up by a small gasoline engine. It has spent CDollars 22m (Pounds 9.8m) since 1991 proving technical feasibility and will spend a further CDollars 50m to reach the commercialisation phase. The hybrid traction system, designed and developed by researcher Pierre Couture, uses high-efficiency batteries to drive electric motors in each of a car's four wheels. A conventional gearbox, differential, drive shaft and gasoline engine are not needed. A small gasoline engine recharges the batteries. The whole system, including central generator-motor, is computer controlled. It has a 30hp, two-stroke gasoline engine, with a catalytic converter. The engine runs for a maximum of 30 minutes per hour of driving. Couture says the system offers twice a conventional (internal combustion engine) car's energy efficiency, reduces emissions and makes significant savings in materials. Total vehicle weight is about the same as conventional cars. Manufacturing costs could be less. Hydro is testing the technology on a standard Chrysler Intrepid sedan. Its rear wheels are driven by individual electric motors powered by batteries kept in the boot. The normal frontwheel drive system is disengaged. Many groups are working on electric cars and hybrids worldwide. Recent US research shows that better design and electronics could raise average mileage per gallon to 46, or 65 per cent, according to research, but this is likely to add Dollars 1,000 (Pounds 610) to the cost.
19941214000000000	FT  14 DEC 94 / Business and the Environment: Drive to overcome electric car barriers - John Griffiths is persuaded of the potential valueof a zinc-air battery powered vehicle. The scene: a Los Angeles petrol station, in a few years' time. A medium-sized family car pulls in from the highway and hums up to the line of pumps. The driver ignores the petrol and diesel nozzles. Instead, he reaches for the one marked potassium hydroxide. Five minutes later, just like its petrol-fuelled counterpart which has filled up at the adjacent pump, the battery-powered car is on its way. By applying some lateral thinking, California's SRI International  - still best known by its old name of the Stanford Research Institute  - and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories believe they may have the answer to two of the biggest technological hurdles which for years have bedevilled attempts to produce viable battery-powered cars. The hurdles are the lack of mileage provided by batteries between recharges  - few of the prototype cars so far developed have proved capable of more than 60-100 miles  - and the length of time needed for a complete recharge; usually several hours. Seeking to improve these performance parameters has led vehicle and battery makers and government research teams around the world into multi-billion dollar efforts to develop 'super-batteries'. These efforts have been made more urgent for car makers by California's adoption of legislation requiring 2 per cent of new car sales to be of non-polluting 'zero-emission vehicles' in 1998, rising to 10 per cent in 2003. Thirteen other US states are soon to follow suit. More powerful 'conventional' lead/acid batteries have been developed, as well as new types of battery using different materials for the process  - electrolysis  - by which electrical current is generated. But all fall far short of providing the range and versatility of a petrol car and most have other drawbacks. Some use materials that would be too costly to put into mass production, others have technological problems, such as the sodium-sulphur batteries that need to operate at several hundred degrees centigrade. SRI and Lawrence Berkeley Labs have opted for a 'zinc-air' battery, which generates its power by reacting zinc and oxygen in an electrolyte comprising zinc particles suspended in potassium hydroxide. This battery has a good, but not outstanding, performance  - with a mileage of just over 100 miles in a medium-sized vehicle  - compared with other new battery technologies, and has the advantage of using cheap and readily available raw materials. What makes SRI's approach radical, however, is the concept of not recharging the battery electrically. Instead, the spent electrolyte is physically drained and fresh electrolyte simply pumped in as 'fuel'. SRI maintains that not only does this quick 'refuelling' eliminate the biggest impediment to driver acceptance of the battery car, but it also allows the potentially huge infrastructure problems of electrical vehicles to be swept away. There would be no need to dig up city streets to install a roadside charging infrastructure; no need for festoons of power cables from houses to cars; no need for businesses to provide recharging facilities for employees' cars to make sure their cars can reach home. Garages would merely have to add two more tanks to their fuel storage systems. One would pump in the new 'fuel', the other would take the spent electrolyte to storage tanks for collection. The spent electrolyte collected from a network of garages would then be regenerated at central recharging stations in a safe and controlled setting, using off-peak electricity, before being redistributed. 'This feature is so attractive that one major oil company has become a key supporter of our concept,' according to Joe Rudzinski, one of SRI's executives involved with the project. SRI, one of the world's biggest independent research and consulting organisations, is starting a Dollars 4m (Pounds 2.4m) prototype programme to prove the concept's overall practicality. Its projected cost of a battery pack is around Dollars 3,000. It also forecasts a forecourt refuelling cost of Dollars 12.30, compared with Dollars 11.35 for a petrol vehicle of the same size travelling an identical mileage  - a premium which Californian legislators and citizens are likely to regard as a small price for relieving the state's notorious air pollution. Sixty-three per cent of Californians said in a survey recently they would probably or definitely consider buying an electric car. The survey of 400 Californians, commissioned by specialist newspaper Automotive News, was taken immediately before EVS-12, the biennial symposium on electric vehicles currently taking place in Los Angeles. Fifteen per cent said they were prepared to pay up to Dollars 5,000 more than for a conventional car. North America's electricity utility industry is expected to watch the SRI developments with mixed feelings. Whichever battery-powered car proves most commercially successful, the electricity supply industry will benefit  - from extra electricity demand arising from a large battery vehicle population. But it also sees a considerable business opportunity in the development and provision of an infrastructure for the electrical recharging of a battery car population, and has been working within the US Advanced Battery Consortium  - a federal government-backed, Dollars 1bn project linking US car and battery makers and utilities  - on how best to provide one. If SRI's radical approach is successful, much of that opportunity could slip from its grasp.
