10000000000000000	Turkey and the European Union What positive and negative developments have there been in Turkey s efforts to become a formal member of the European Union.
19960227193800000	Turkey Urges EU To Release Financial Aid. ANKARA, February 27 (Xinhua) -- Turkey today welcomed the European Union's attitude toward its dispute with Greece and urged the EU to release financial assistance immediately despite Greek efforts to block it. The EU foreign ministers' meeting on Monday turned down a Greek proposal to adopt a common condemnation of Turkey concerning the two countries' dispute over an Aegean islet. The dispute flared up last month when both Turkey and Greece claimed sovereignty over a set of small islands, called Kardak in Turkish and Imia in Greek, in the Aegean Sea. The United States later intervened, preventing a war between the two NATO members. According to a Turkish Foreign Ministry statement, the European Union has taken up, during Monday's meeting, the situation between Turkey and Greece. The statement added that Greece, despite its attempts, was unable to get the support of the other 14 European Union members in getting a statement that would express solidarity with Greece and condemn Turkey. "Turkey welcomes the reaffirmation of the European Union's 14 members to carry out their obligations toward Turkey within the framework of customs union," the statement said. Meanwhile, Ankara also urged the EU to release its planned financial assistance, a sum of 375 million ECU (483.75 million U.S. dollars), despite Greek attempt to block it. "We expect the European Union to take the decision for the implementation of the financial assistance, an indispensable factor...in the customs union, as soon as possible," said the statement. Reports say Britain and France have urged Greece not to force the EU into a legal battle with Turkey over the financial assistance. Ankara maintains that the withholding of the assistance would be a violation of the customs union accord, which might go as far as to the European Court of Justice.
19960408193000000	West European Union Chief to Visit Turkey. ANKARA, April 8 (Xinhua) -- Jose Cutileiro, Secretary-General of the Western European Union (WEU), will visit Turkey on April 11-14, the Anatolia news agency reported today. Cutileiro will be received by Turkish President Suleyman Demirel, Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz and other high-ranking officials, Anatolia quoted Foreign Ministry spokesman Omer Akbel as saying. During the first visit by a WEU secretary-general, Cutileiro is expected to discuss with Turkish officials issues such as the security of Europe, the WEU's role in European defense and Turkey's contributions to the union. Turkey is not a formal but an associate member of WEU.
19960919000000000	European Parliament Blocks Special Aid to Turkey. PARIS, September 19 (Xinhua) -- The European Parliament today voted to block a 53 million ECU (70 million U.S. dollars) special aid package to Turkey because of what it called a "deterioration in the human rights situation" in the country. Members of the European Parliament in Strasbourg voted 319 for, 23 against the resolution with 20 abstentions, according to local media reports. The European Parliament accused Turkey of "increasing provocation in the Aegean Sea and in Cyprus, and aggressions in the north of Iraq." The special aid is part of the agreement between the European Union (EU) and Turkey on the establishment of a customs union between the two sides. The European Parliament also called on the European Commission not to allow Turkey access to EU aid under the "Meda" program for Mediterranean countries, except for projects concerning the "promotion of democracy and human rights." The resolution condemned "the brutal assassination of two Greek Cypriots by Turkish soldiers supported by para-military forces," during inter-ethnic confrontation last month on the divided Mediterranean island of Cyprus.
19961025201000000	European Parliament Accused of Freezing Aid to Turkey. ANKARA, October 25 (Xinhua) -- Turkey tonight accused the European Parliament of voting to block European Union's aid to Turkey. A statement issued by the Turkish Foreign Ministry said: "It is impossible for us to accept the contents and the reasons of the decision made by the European Parliament related to the scheduled aid to Turkey." " Like its decision on September 19, 1996, the European Parliament has pursued its attitude preventing the cooperation between Turkey and the European Union (EU)," the statement said. It urged the EU member states to show their " necessary reactions to this preventive attitude of the European Parliament." The European Parliament, angered by Turkey's human rights record, voted Thursday to freeze hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars in aid to Turkey for setting up a customs union with the EU. In addition, the European Parliament voted to review substantial financing for Turkey from the EU's MEDA Program, through which up to 842 million ECUs was envisaged for the bloc's Mediterranean neighbors in 1997.
19970206204700000	NATO Chief: Turkey May Not Veto NATO Expansion. ANKARA, February 6 (Xinhua) -- NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana today said he is hopeful that Turkey would not veto the planned NATO expansion. Before his departure from his 24-hour visit to Ankara, Solana told reporters at airport that "I think it has been very positive to understand the position of Turkey." During his stay here, Turkish leaders reiterated their position to link the expansion of the NATO with Turkey's entry into the European Union. Turkey has warned that it might block plans for the NATO expansion if its plea for EU accession is stalled. The European Commission is considering the membership applications by up to 10 possible candidates, but Turkey is not among them. Solana said "I think we will be able to calm that concern." In what was regarded as an attempt to allay Turkey's concern, Solana said NATO would include Turkey in military operations by the Western European Union, the EU's military body. In a press statement issued following his meeting with Solana, Turkish President Suleyman Demirel said that Turkey will not support the enlargement of the NATO because the EU does not admit Turkey into the regional alliance. Demirel said, "Although we are for the enlargement of the NATO in principle, we think that it is important for this issue to be evaluated within the general framework of European new formation." He said that Turkey should take its place in a European family picture in the EU summit scheduled to be held in Amsterdam in June.
19970312000000000	US Urges EU to Accept Turkey. WASHINGTON, March 11 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. government said today that the European Union (EU) should accept Turkey as its new member in the future. "Turkey is a European country," State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns told reporters. "We strongly believe that the European Union should allow the possibility of Turkish membership in the future." The 15-nation EU rejected a membership of Turkey last week. Some EU members insisted that Turkey is an Asian nation, not European. "We don't have a vote in the European Union, nor do we seek one," Burns said. "But we very respectfully think of Turkey as a European country and not send negative signals to Turkey." Turkey, already a member country of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), signed an agreement on Customs Union with the EU in January 1996 and has been seeking an EU membership.
19970317185800000	Turkey Hails EU Statement on Ankara's Membership. ANKARA, March 17 (Xinhua) -- Turkey today welcomed a statement by the European Union (EU), which confirmed the perspective of Turkey's full membership to the group. It is the first time that the EU mentioned the possibility of Turkey's membership in the Union and it would pave the way for Turkey to take up a position, Turkey's Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Tansu Ciller said at a news conference here. She said her country would make new efforts toward full EU membership. "Our struggle will start from now on," she said. The EU statement was issued Sunday at the end of a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Apeldoorn, the Netherlands. It said that Turkey was recognized as having a European future and it would be treated in the same way as others seeking the EU membership. The statement came following a March 4 statement by the EU Christian Democrats which called Turkey's membership application unacceptable. Ciller stressed that Turkey had been a NATO member for 46 years and was the only customs union member among the EU, adding that it was impossible to exclude Turkey, which applied for full membership in the Union in 1987, from the expansion process of the EU. Turkey currently has a customs union agreement with the EU, which removed some trade barriers. Turkish President Suleyman Demirel has also expressed his satisfaction over the EU message, saying that "Turkey's European horizon has been opened."
19980101000000000	Turkey Urged to Change Position Towards Greece. ATHENS, December 31 (Xinhua) -- Greek Defense Minister Akis Tsohatzopoulos today called on neighboring Turkey to change its stance towards Greece. In his new year message, Tsohatzopoulos stressed that aggressiveness did not help Turkey's relations with the European Union (EU), and Turkey should give serious consideration to the problems noted by the 15-nation bloc. He pointed out that if Turkey realised this in the future, it would greatly help to improve the current climate. Earlier this month, the EU decided not to include Turkey on the list of nations waiting to join the bloc, on the grounds of Turkey's "poor human rights and bad relations with Greece." After that, Turkey announced the suspension of its political dialogue with the EU and increased its pressure upon Greece. Tension between the two neighboring countries intensified recently with the mutual expulsion of diplomats and violations of Greek airspace by Turkish jet fighters.
19980123000000000	Britain Wants to See Turkey at London Meeting. ANKARA, January 22 (Xinhua) -- The British ambassador to Turkey Thursday indirectly expressed the hope that Turkey could participate in the European Union (EU) meeting scheduled for March in London, according to the Anatolia News Agency. Turkey can profit from "some substantial profits" provided by the EU, David Logan told a press conference here, which was jointly held with EU representative in Ankara, Michel Lake. Commenting on the present bitter relations between Turkey and EU, Logan noted that Ankara should not negatively evaluate the Luxembourg summit last December from an overall point of view. He, however said that he understands Turkey's frustration over the EU decisions. The EU leaders excluded Turkey from the ranks of the prospective candidates for the EU expansion process during the summit, smashing Turkey's dream of becoming full EU member state in this century. In retaliation, Turkey announced a halt of political dialog with the European body to protest its "discriminative attitude" toward the country. Observers here believe that Britain, which holds the term presidency of the EU, hopes it can persuade Turkey to attend the London meeting which deals with the EU accession issues. In his part, Lake said that maintaining a good relationship is in accordance with the economic interests of both Turkey and the EU. "The customs union continues to have a positive impact in Turkey and on Turkey's trade relations with the EU," he said, referring to the customs union agreement which took effect in 1996. Despite its compliant over the Luxembourg decision, Turkey has made it very clear that it would continue to develop economic cooperation with the 15 EU nations. The EU is the largest trade partner of Turkey with traditional links. Turkey submitted its formal application for the EU membership in 1987, but so far the goal has not been achieved due to its various differences with the EU, such as on human rights, economic problems as well as the Cyprus issue.
19980305000000000	EU Proposes Strategy to Improve Ties With Turkey. BRUSSELS, March 4 (Xinhua) -- The European Commission, the European Union (EU)'s executive arm, Wednesday proposed a strategy for deepening Turkey's ties with the EU. The Commission Wednesday made the proposal in a bid to improve its badly soured relations with Turkey over Ankara's frustrated efforts to be accepted as a candidate for EU membership. It urged the EU members to release a fund of some 375 million ECUs (around 400 million U.S. dollars) to finance the strategy, which includes a broader customs union and cooperation in industry, services and agriculture. "The European strategy which we proposed for Turkey will lead to a deepening of our relations. This will be to the benefit of all our citizens," EU Foreign Affairs Commissioner Hans van den Broek said at a press conference. He indicated that Turkey's democratic institutions and human rights records must be improved in order to prepare itself for the eventual EU membership. "I think we have made clear what we expect from Turkey and what we have to offer for Turkey," said the commissioner, who also said that Ankara was now not interested in political dialogue with the EU. In a second report to the European Parliament, the Commission said the Turkish government's program for improving the human rights situation and democratization "has not yet had sufficient impact on the situation."
19980526000000000	Kinkel Does Not See EU Membership for Turkey in. BONN, May 25 (Xinhua) -- German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel said Monday he did not expect that Turkey would be admitted into the European Union "in foreseeable future". "The decisive factors are not the cultural ones, but the human rights situation, the conflict with the Kurds, the country's economic problems and its relations with Greece," said Kinkel at a conference on the subject of "Islam and Europe" in Berlin. Despite the EU membership dispute with Turkey, Kinkel stressed Germany wanted to strengthen relations with the country in all areas. The relations between Turkey and EU have been soured after EU leaders decided last December not to accept Turkey as an official new member candidate, though they did not rule out its candidacy in the future. Turkey's Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz has blamed German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for blocking Turkey's entry into the EU due to its Islamic background.
19980608162500000	Greece Supports Turkey's EU Membership. ISTANBUL, June 8 (Xinhua) -- Greek Foreign Minister Theodoros Pangalos said here Monday that Greece has no intention of preventing Turkey from being admitted into the European Union (EU). Delivering a speech at the Balkan Foreign Ministerial Meeting opening Monday morning in Turkey's largest city of Istanbul, Pangalos said that Turkey is an European nation and its efforts for full EU membership should be encouraged. "Greece has always supported the European orientation of Turkey. Greece is opposed to the view that the European Union is limited by historic or religious traditions," Panglos said. He noted that "Today's reality is different. Participation of Turkey in the European Conference can be a successful first step." Turkey has repeatedly accused Greece of undermining Turkey's efforts for EU membership, but the charge is rejected by Athens. Ankara halted its political dialog with the EU last December when the EU Luxembourg summit excluded Turkey from the ranks of candidates for its enlargement process, saying that the European body made this decision on the basis of "a discriminative attitude " toward the Muslim country. Greece and Turkey have long been at odds over the Aegean Sea and the Cyprus issue. Regional security, such as the Kosovo issue, and economic cooperation will be taken up at the two-day foreign ministerial meeting of the Balkan countries.
19981023000000000	Reppas: Greece Will React Strongly for Releasing EU. ATHENS, October 22 (Xinhua) -- Greece threatened Thursday to react strongly if the European Commission's decision to release a 155- million-dollar package of economic aid to Turkey was approved by the European Union (EU) Council of Ministers. Speaking at a press briefing, Greek government spokesman Dimitris Reppas attributed the commission's decision to "expediencies." Greece's reaction would be without delay, he added. The spokesman said that Greece would increase its bilateral contacts in order to promote the country's national interests in the most effective way. The European Commission's proposal for the release of the EU funds to Turkey, which was raised by External Affairs Commissioner Hans Van Den Broek, was approved Wednesday. The commission's plan will prevent Greece from exercising its right to veto by introducing a new regulation terming Turkey a developing country, which requires only a special majority for approval by the EU Council of Ministers. In 1996, Greece blocked an aid package worth 450 million dollars accompanying the EU-Turkey customs union. Earlier this week, Greece warned that it would refer the European Commission to the European Court of Justice. Greece has said that it supports Turkey's European vocation but Ankara must improve both its human rights record and its relations with Athens.
19981105081100000	Turkey praises EU decision on candidacy. ANKARA, Turkey (AP) _ Turkey's foreign minister on Thursday said the European Union's definition of Turkey as a candidate for membership will pave the way to improved relations between Brussels and Ankara. 
19981209072100000	Turkey demands formal recognition for EU membership. ANKARA, Turkey (AP) _ Turkey said Wednesday it wants the European Union to make it a formal candidate for membership at its summit later this week. 
19990216000000000	Italy Urges Turkey to Meet European Standards in Ocalan's Trial. ROME, February 16 (Xinhua) -- Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini said Tuesday that Italy expects Ocalan's trial in Turkey will meet standards and guarantees laid down by the Council of Europe, of which Turkey is a member. He said that those conventions do not envisage the death penalty, and the Ocalan case could test Turkey's ability to meet European standards and may help its bid to join the European Union. He said Italy would continue to support that bid as long as Turkey moves closer to Europe on human and civil rights and the treatment of minorities, the main stumbling block to its EU ambitions. Dini added that Italy and the European Union condemned all forms of terrorism and urged Kurds everywhere to refrain from violent protest against Ocalan's capture. Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit announced Tuesday that Ocalan was brought to Turkey from Nairobi. Ocalan's Italian lawyers confirmed that Tuesday morning that the Greek embassy in Nairobi had turned Ocalan to Kenyan authorities, and then with the permission of Kenya, Turkey took Ocalan back to the country with a special military airplane.
19990825000000000	EU Considering New Aid to Turkey. BRUSSELS, August 25 (Xinhua) -- The European Union is considering granting a second emergency aid to quake-stricken Turkey as senior officials of the bloc are scheduled to visit the country on Wednesday. Finnish Foreign Minister Tarja Halonen, whose country is serving the rotating presidency of the European Union, and European Union Foreign Relations Commissioner Hans van den Broek are to meet in Ankara with Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit and Foreign Minister Ismail Cem. They are to assess the damage caused by the August 17 earthquake, which has so far claimed a death toll of more than 12, 000 people in northwestern Turkey, and plans of EU's aid to rehabilitate and reconstruct the devastated region. Last week, the EU granted a 2-million-euro (2.06 million U.S. dollar) emergency aid to Turkey. The European Commission is to discuss on Thursday the granting of a second aid package which is said to be similar in amount to the first one. The European Commission is also to discuss in September a more elaborate action plan to support Turkey, whose relationship with the union went awry after the union stopped short of letting it join the grouping among the first batch of countries.
19990901000000000	Italy Urges EU to Accept Turkey's Entrance. ROME, August 31 (Xinhua) -- The European Union (EU) can no longer put off the question of Turkey's possible entrance into the continent-wide union, said Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini Tuesday. Talking with the financial daily Il Sole 24 Ore, Dini said the EU will have to "recognize Turkey's right to bear the title of candidate of the union" at its December meeting in Helsinki. The Italian foreign minister added that in the face of the recent devastating earthquake in Turkey, the EU "cannot further delay the choice" for Ankara. "In light of the recent tragedies, the economy of a great Mediterranean country is at risk," Dini told the newspaper. "The European Union, without renouncing its principles," will have to decide in December to allow Turkey to become a formal candidate for EU membership.
19990904000000000	Greece Hopes Turkey to Become Candidate for EU Membership. ATHENS, September 3 (Xinhua) -- Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou said Friday that his country was keen to see neighboring Turkey become a candidate for European Union (EU) membership. Speaking after meeting with Greek President Costis Stephanopoulos, Papandreou said that Greece wanted to see Turkey as a candidate country but Turkey and Greece's partners could not overlook the fact that the neighboring country had responsibilities and obligations. If Turkey was ready to undertake these responsibilities, Greece had no objection to helping, he noted. For decades, Greece and Turkey, both NATO members, have been at odds over their disputes in the territorial waters, air space limits and the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Aegean Sea and the Cyprus problem. Greece has also consistently blocked the more than 1-billion U.S. dollars EU financial aid to Turkey. Greece has repeatedly said that it supports Turkey in its efforts to join EU but the condition is that Ankara must improve its human rights record and its relations with Athens. To ease its tense relations with Turkey, Greece will in the near future partially lift its veto on EU funding for Turkey after the devastating earthquake in northwestern Turkey, which has claimed thousands of lives.
20000114002500000	EDITORIAL: TURKEY POSTPONES A HANGING. The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Jan. 14: Turkey made the right choice in deferring the execution of Abdullah Ocalan, the Kurdish rebel leader, until the European Court of Human Rights hears his appeal. The decision took political courage in a country where passions against Ocalan run high. But it will help smooth Turkey's path into the European Union, and may permit a solution to the Kurdish conflict, Turkey's most vexing internal problem. Turkey is not obliged to follow the court's ruling, but has obeyed its decisions in the past. Ocalan was seized in Kenya last February, brought to Turkey and tried for the murder of the more than 30,000 people killed in the Kurdish insurgency. He was convicted and sentenced to death last June. Ocalan has tried to bargain for his life by offering to broker an end to the 15-year-long Kurdish conflict. He has also ordered his followers to withdraw from battle. As a result Kurdish violence inside Turkey has sharply diminished. Others with terrorist pasts, like Yasser Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Gerry Adams of the Irish Republican Army's political wing, Sinn Fein, have swapped violence for political bargaining and contributed to peacemaking. Istanbul should give Ocalan a chance to do the same. Delaying his execution will ease European concerns about Turkey's human rights record and its retention of the death penalty, which all members of the European Union have abolished. Turkey has not executed anyone since 1984. Ending that moratorium would be a mistake. Turkey should not just postpone Ocalan's hanging, but cancel it.  &QL;
20000203000000000	Major News Items in Leading Turkish Newspapers. ANKARA, February 3 (Xinhua) -- The following are major news items in leading Turkish newspapers on Thursday. Milliyet (National): -- The European Union is extending 750 million U.S. dollars in loans to Turkey. It is the initial fruits for Turkey to be accepted as a candidate of EU membership at Helsinki summit last December. This move indicated the first step of the financial cooperation between EU and Turkey. Hurriyet (Freedom): -- Turkish parliament Wednesday passed a legislation for "the Convention to Prevent Bribe Given to Foreign Public Servants in International Trade Transactions." Effectively, this law will make Turkey accept bribe as an international crime. The country has realized that bribe has spoiled the economic structure of developing countries. Turkish Daily News: -- Turkey's exports increased by 8.37 percent to 1.9 billion dollars in January 2000 in comparison to the same month last year. The largest growth in exports was experienced by the automotive sector, followed by electronics and leather goods.
20000301000000000	EU, Turkey Meet on Accession Prospect. BRUSSELS, March 1 (Xinhua) -- The European Union and Turkey have met here to discuss the latter's prospect of accession to the 15-nation western bloc, the European Commission said Wednesday. The bilateral meeting, held Tuesday between EU Economy and Finance Commissioner Pedro Solbes Mira and Turkish Economy Minister Recep Onal, reviewed the fact that Turkey had initiated an economic stability program in order to decrease inflation and increase economic growth. Both Solbes and Onal expressed their willingness to initiate a dialogue in the economic and monetary fields between the European Union and Turkey that was included in the accession list only last December. The European Union spoke highly of Turkey's accession-oriented achievements and the emphasis of the meeting was put on the importance of the assistance the EU nations would give Turkey during the pre-accession period. Turkey had been asking for three decades to join the European Union but its demand was turned away by the European Union in December 1997 that led to a deterioration of bilateral relations. The heads of state and government of the European Union decided last December in Helsinki to include Turkey in its list of accession that already includes Poland, the Czech Republic , Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Cyprus, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia, Lithuania, Bulgaria and Malta. The EU has started official accession negotiations with the 12 countries but did not do the same with Turkey. Some EU member states have been criticizing the human rights record of the country that strides over two continents. Turkey is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
20000511000000000	Applicants Urged to Publicize EU Accession. BRUSSELS, May 11 (Xinhua) -- The east and central European countries applying for European Union membership are requested to inform their citizens about their move and the consequence. The European Commission, the executive body of the 15-nation bloc, requested the applicant countries to improve public knowledge and understanding of the union, to explain the implications of accession into the union, and to explain the link between the pace of preparations for membership and the progress of the negotiations. The request was put forward in a communication strategy made public here on Thursday by the commission. "The accession to the European Union of the central and eastern European countries gives rise to expectations as well as fears," said EU education commissioner Viviane Reding. "The information and communication campaign launched by the commission aims to inform the European citizen, in an objective and reasoned way, of the stakes and the challenges of enlargement." The commission also urged EU member states to communicate the reasons for enlargement to their citizens as well, to promote dialogue at all levels of society between policy-makers and the public on issues related to enlargement and to provide information about the candidate countries to promote general understanding. The enlargement awareness campaign will run from 2000 to 2006 with a budget of nearly 150 million euro (139 million U.S. dollars EU enlargement commissioner Gunter Verheugen said on Thursday that the year 2005 is the latest to see the enlargement process complete. He added that 10 of the 12 applicant countries are preparing for that date while two others are preparing for later dates, though he would not be specific on the dates the applicant countries would be admitted into the union.
20000621000000000	Turkey Vexed Over Exclusion From EU-led Defense Mechanism. ANKARA, June 21 (Xinhua) -- Turkey is angry over the European Union (EU)'s decision to exclude it from a European defense mechanism, warning the EU not to take for granted the use of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) facilities in Turkey for EU-led operations. Turkish Daily News reported on Wednesday that Ankara was "not satisfied with" the EU decision made Tuesday at the EU summit in Portugal to exclude non-EU members from the so-called European Security and Defense Identity (ESDI). In a statement, Turkish Foreign Ministry called on EU members to reverse its decision at its next summit in Nice, France, in December. The proposed ESDI envisages the establishment of a decision- making structure over defense under the EU, which would be independent of the United States-led NATO and would exclude non-EU members. Turkey, a NATO member and EU candidate, has endeavoured to join the European defense mechanism with the support of the U.S., who fears the ESDI will take the place of the NATO and reduce Washington's role in the European security affairs. Turkish defense officials said Ankara has been an active contributor, within the framework of NATO, to European security since the Cold War and should not be excluded from a European security and defense architecture. When Javier Solana, commissioner for EU foreign and security affairs, visited Ankara early this month, Turkey voiced objections to the ESDI on the grounds that non-EU members, like itself, would be excluded. Turkey insisted that it wants to be involved in the decision- making, rather than the decision-implementing, process. Turkey had also sent a diplomatic note of warning at the end of May to 11 EU countries which are also NATO members over their approach to the ESDI. Turkey, which did not want to see its role reduced in the European security with the evolving structure of the ESDI, stressed that it was not like other non-EU NATO members and had contributed much to European security both in the Cold War and post-Cold War eras.
20000923162500000	Turkey Rights Activist Released. ANKARA, Turkey (AP) -- Turkey's leading human rights activist was released from prison Saturday and said he hoped to be the last person jailed in Turkey under laws curbing freedom of expression. Akin Birdal, former president of the independent Human Rights Association, served 10 months in prison. He was convicted of inciting racial hatred for urging an end to Turkey's 16-year war against Kurdish rebels in the largely Kurdish southeast. ''My hope and wish is to be the last person imprisoned because of writing and voicing ideas,'' Birdal said outside an Ankara prison where he was greeted by 100 human rights activists. Birdal said Turkey had not made concrete steps to improve its human rights record. ''Don't the Turkish people deserve democratization?'' he asked. Turkey is often criticized for its poor human rights record. Europe and the United States have called on Turkey to crack down on torture in police stations and reform its laws curbing freedom. Birdal, 51, is still recovering from an assassination attempt in May 1998, when two assailants shot him six times. Eleven members of a far-right nationalist group were convicted and sentenced in December 1998 to up to 19 months in prison for attempted murder. He was released for health reasons last year after serving three months, but was jailed again in March. Both the European Union and the United States criticized Turkey for jailing Birdal. Scores of activists and writers have been sentenced to prison terms in Turkey for writings and speeches seen as sympathetic to Kurdish rebels. Some 20 cases are still pending against Birdal for his speeches. Turkey does not recognize its 12 million Kurds as a minority and has rejected a cease-fire announced by the rebels last year. The European Union, which Ankara wants to join, is pressing Turkey to find a peaceful solution to the war. Some 37,000 people, mostly Kurds, have been killed in fighting since 1984.
