10000000000000000	El Nino and La Nina weather condition Describe the causes and effects of the El Nino and La Nina weather condition  What programs and scientific techniques are in effect to better predict and cope with the conditions.
19970822152400000	Israeli Scientists Research on Control of El Nino. JERUSALEM, August 22 (Xinhua) -- Israeli scientists have achieved progress in predicting the chaotic behavior of El Nino, a warming of surface water of the equatorial Pacific Ocean, through a sophisticated computer simulation. According to a recent report released by the Weizmann Institute of Science, the study was conducted by professor Eli Tziperman of the Weizmann Institute's Environmental Sciences and Energy Research Department, together with colleague Harvey Scher and with Stephen Zebiak and Mark Cane of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. El Nino usually occurs around December every three to six years. It disrupts weather worldwide, causing storms, floods and droughts. Its exact arrival, however, is extremely difficult to predict with precision because of its chaotic nature. The scientists worked with a computer model currently used to predict El Nino events. When they altered the values for the magnitude of deep ocean waves at a single point in the western Pacific, the model produced El Nino at regular intervals of about four years, with perfectly predictable cycles of temperature, winds and ocean currents. While the scientists do not propose to control the actual El Nino, they do believe that the successful control in a complex prediction model may help them better understand the crucial factors governing El Nino behavior. This, in turn, may improve the researchers' ability to predict El Nino events and lead to measures that could reduce their global damage. A particularly significant El Nino (Spanish for "The Child," referring to the infant Jesus) appears to be brewing in the equatorial Pacific right now, threatening to strike some time later this year.
19971018000000000	El Nino Begins to Influence S. Africa. JOHANNESBURG, October 18 (Xinhua) -- South African weather experts has said that the El Nino weather phenomenon is shaping to hit South Africa stronger than ever before. Long-term forecaster Emsie Klopper said on Thursday that it was clear from current rain patterns that El Nino had arrived. According to the Weather Bureau in Pretoria, the capital of South Africa, the cold and rainy weather being experienced in most parts of the summer rainfall region in South Africa was not normal for this time of year. It was an indication that global weather patterns were being disturbed by an El Niono event, the bureau said. Mike Edwards, spokesman for the bureau, said the disturbed weather patterns were proof that El Nino was having an effect on South African weather, and that earlier forecasts for dry conditions from November to March were correct. The general El Nino forceast was that in South Africa and other countries in the Southern Hemisphere normal or above-normal rainfall would occur in the first part of the season with a drier spell in the second part of the season. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry said earlier that South Africa was in a better position this year than it was when the previous serious El Nino event struck in 1982/83. South Africa's water storage levels at major reservoirs were the best since 1940 and there should be enough water to last through the normal duration of an El Nino event, the department said.
19971103000000000	Link Shown Between El Nino, Global Warming: Experts. CANBERRA, November 3 (Xinhua) -- Australian scientists have uncovered a link between global warming and the increasing frequency of the El Nino weather system, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) reported tonight. The Four Corners TV program claimed scientific data were showing that a man-made permanent drought was in the offing as a result of global warming. Steve Wilson, a scientist of the climate modeling program at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), Australia's top national scientific research body, explained that a sophisticated computer model set up at the CSIRO laboratories showed a relationship between sea surface temperature anomalies and the warm El Nino phase. When the present levels of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide were doubled in the experiment, the number of El Ninos affecting Australia nearly doubled too, the scientist said. Barry Hunt, leader of the research project, told the program he wanted more time to verify the model's findings. "We'd like to do a more elaborate and longer experiment but as far as I know, we are the only group who actually found the change in the frequency of El Nino events," Hunt said. The program said experiments on the relationship between increasing carbon dioxide levels and global warming being done at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii supported the Australian claims. "It appears that we have a very good case for suggesting that the El Ninos are going to become more frequent ... and more intense and, in a few years or a decade, so we'll go into a permanent El Nino," Mauna Loa Director Russell Schneider told the program. Hunt said climate warming's affect on El Nino was complex, even showing that a gradual increase in carbon dioxide output would make the Australian continent drier, while, if the output were doubled, the effect would actually make Australia wetter. The model's scenario showed Australia getting drier for about 100 years at which time it would become wetter than it currently is. The United Nations Climate Convention will be held in Japan next month and Australia has argued against binding uniform targets, preferring the concept of differentiation which would consider the varying economic circumstances of developed countries.
19971122000000000	WMO Holds Meeting on El Nino. GENEVA, November 21 (Xinhua) -- The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) held a first follow-up meeting on El Nino here today after a United Nations inter-agency task force on the phenomenon was set up on Wednesday. The meeting will provide scientific and technical information on the current status of El Nino, as one of the major forces acting on the global climate system and with a potential to affect weather patterns in many areas of the globe. According to WMO, strong warm episode (El Nino) conditions have persisted in the tropical Pacific since July 1997. Sea surface temperatures throughout the equatorial east-central Pacific increased during April and May, when temperatures normally decrease in this region. During August and September, ocean surface temperatures reached near-record levels in many sections of the equatorial Pacific. Departures from normal exceeded +4 degrees Celsius along the Equator east of 120 degrees West, and were greater than +5 degrees Celsius near the Galapagos Islands and along the coast of northern Peru, WMO says in its new publication, El Nino Update.
19971210000000000	NASA: El Nino is Petering out. WASHINGTON, December 9 (Xinhua) --U.S. space agency NASA said that the warm Pacific water current known as El Nino has become weaker, shrinking by at least 10 percent and falling to the level last observed in early September, the Los Angeles Times reported today. Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory came the conclusion after analyzing the data collected from satellite last week. Climate experts said this year's El Nino was one of the century's largest and most disruptive weather phenomena. However the latest data on El Nino from a NASA satellite made them conclude that El Nino has completed its second peak. Over the next several weeks, the El Nino current could peter out, or it may simply be pausing before gathering greater force, they said.
19980228000000000	Most of California Become Disaster Zones Due to El Nino. LOS ANGELES, February 27 (Xinhua) -- Nearly two-thirds of the 58 counties of California have been declared as federal disaster zones due to the El Nino weather phenomenon. At least seven people have been killed and an estimated 500 million U.S. dollars worth of property damaged in El Nino-caused storms, floods and mudslides since the beginning of the year. Economists predict that the employment figures for January and February to be released will show a drop in construction industry due to the El Nino factor. Milk production has dropped 5 percent in the whole California and 7 percent in Los Angeles this month. El Nino also forced a delay in spring planting of nursery goods, which boasts the third-largest crop in California. Compared with the previous disaster in California, the 1994 earthquake, which claimed 61 deaths and more than 10 billion dollars in damage, the current damage resulting from El Nino may be just a drop in the bucket. However, forecasters have warned that the El Nino weather phenomenon will continue raging through late spring. "El Nino will remain the same for the next two to three months at least," said Vernon Kousky, a senior chief analyst in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. It was impossible to tell if the worst has been over or if even more violent weather is on the way, he added.
19980306054300000	World meteorologists say El Nino disruptions coming to an end.
19980521000000000	Chinese Scientists Say El Nino Due Next Around 2002. BEIJING, May 21 (Xinhua) -- China's National Research Center for Marine Environmental Forecasts said today that next El Nino will occur around 2002. According to the center's Dr. Wang Zhanggui, El Nino is related to sunspot activity, and generally occurs four to five years after a period of little sunspot activity, which was the case last year, when there was strong El Nino activity. Song Xuejia, the center's deputy director, says that no other scientists have made such a "bold prediction" before. They reached their conclusion after having studied a large amount of materials on unspots and El Nino for the last 250 years. "No El Nino has occurred in the last 100 years, for which records are quite complete, in a period when sunspot activity increases," Wang said. Sunspot activity is expected to increase this year and will reach its apex in 2000, according to the Royal Observatory of Belgium. Sunspot activity will decrease again in 2006 and complete another cycle. Wang predicts that two to three El Ninos will occur in the first seven years of the next century. Wang and his colleagues found the links between sunspot activity and El Nino through satellite photos, and say that sunspot activity can affect ocean temperatures and cloud, which give rise to El Nino.
19980706000000000	Bangladesh Studies Effects of El Nino to Help Farmers. DHAKA, July 6 (Xinhua) -- Bangladesh is studying the effects of El Nino in order to develop a model to help farmers understand the global weather pattern when the ocean current in the Pacific coast off Peru warms up or cools down, a press report said Monday. Bangladesh's Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization (SPARRSO) is monitoring the El Nino phenomenon, which is responsible for rains or drought world-wide, to help the country's farmers cope with its effects, SPARRSO director Dr. A.M. Chowdhury told a recent function at the Bangladesh Institute of Strategic Studies. Farmers needed help to chart their crop calendar to keep themselves updated with the changing mood of nature to better cope with it, and vary the sowing and planting periods, he said, adding that the model would be prepared by the SPARRSO and the Bangladesh Agriculture Research Council. "It has become imperative in the backdrop of past performance of El Nino," the weather expert said. Since El Nino went 'retreating' in May, it has begun casting its eye on Bangladesh for the past few days, bringing much needed rains, he noted, adding that the reverse was likely to trigger rainfall and flooding. On the past effects of El Nino, he said that after it occurred in 1972-73, El Nino reversed to trigger floods in 1974, in 1982-83 it reversed into a spate of flooding, and again in 1986, El Nino led to the worst flooding when it reversed in 1987 and 1988 respectively, he said. The phenomenon had been responsible for only 40 percent rainfall in the country in June, he said. "Not only we had 60 percent less rainfall in June, but it also delayed the arrival of Monsoon by a month," he added.
19980926011200000	WEAKENING LA NINA MAY NOT BRING DRY WINTER. LOS ANGELES -- Despite predictions that La Nina would bring Los Angeles a dry winter and possibly worsen the fire season, the weather phenomenon now appears to be losing strength, according to scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The pool of cold Pacific water that is the heart of La Nina has shrunk to one-fourth the size it was in May, even as warm water left over from El Nino remains, said Bill Patzert, a researcher at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration laboratory in suburban Pasadena. If La Nina dissipates before it hits Los Angeles, the area could face a more typical wet winter. ``It's really a question at this point: Will La Nina wane as El Nino lingers?'' he said. La Nina and El Nino form the opposite ends of the same climatic cycle, with El Nino fueled by unusually warm water in the eastern Pacific and La Nina driven by cold. Each can bring drought to some parts of the planet while drenching others with rain. Just two weeks ago, National Weather Service experts predicted that La Nina -- a phenomenon whose effects are roughly the opposite of El Nino's -- would bring Los Angeles a slightly drier year than normal. Don't count La Nina out yet. Patzert and other weather experts say the cold water pool often fluctuates in size as the phenomenon builds. ``El Nino and La Nina are things that change slowly over time,'' said Ants Leetmaa, director of the weather service's Climate Prediction Center. ``It's pretty dangerous to look week to week.'' He said the center predicted that after rapid cooling during the summer, ocean temperatures would rebound before cooling again. ``The forecasts are still on track,'' he said. Although the current La Nina conditions are following on the heels of last winter's El Nino, they often occur years apart and don't alternate in an orderly progression. This summer has been unusual, with a growing La Nina sharing the ocean with remnants of the strongest El Nino on record. Although La Nina is already affecting rainfall in Southeast Asia, it hasn't noticeably influenced North America's weather yet, Leetmaa said Instead, it may be that warm water left over from El Nino is contributing to the formation of more tropical storms than normal in the eastern Pacific. ``We had a hundred-year El Nino, and it really rang the Pacific's bell,'' Leetmaa said. XXX
19981012184800000	`CHASING EL NINO': A BOLD ASSAULT ON EL NINO'S MYSTERIES. On Tuesday, ``Nova'' ventures on the track of El Nino, the mysterious phenomenon that every few years rages out of the Pacific Ocean to wreak havoc around the world. Its impact in 1997 and 1998 is fresh in memory. What happens when El Nino strikes is lamentably clear; the puzzle of why has sent a team of scientists, the focus of Tuesday's program, patrolling the Pacific with a long line of data-collecting stations. What the scientists know already is that El Nino disrupts normal weather patterns: Trade winds may reverse direction, sending the warm water that normally moves toward Australia and Indonesia back toward the South American coast, with infamous consequences. In the 1982-83 El Nino, areas of Peru, which was hit first, received 30 times the normal rainfall; the flooding cost Peru some $1 billion in damages and 600 deaths. Worldwide damage came to $13 billion and 2,000 deaths. Put in place in 1994, the El Nino detection system, perhaps the largest scientific instrument ever built, is kept afloat by buoys. Constantly monitoring the Pacific's winds and waves, the system's 70 stations can come up with hints of suspicious changes and may deliver an El Nino forecast, as they did in 1997. But what was predicted to be a minor event, as one forecaster concedes and television viewers may recall, turned out to be a ``whopper.'' A result was destruction from Africa to California, where meteorologists can be seen flying smack into the storms to measure their impact. It makes for quite a show, and the only sure prediction about El Nino is that it will come again. PRODUCTION NOTES: `NOVA' Chasing El Nino 8 p.m. ET Tuesday on PBS Written, produced and directed by Carol L. Fleisher; Alex A. Adams and Mark S. Hoover, co-producers.
19981101072800000	U.N.: La Nina fueled by continuing drop in Pacific temperatures. GENEVA (AP) _ The surface of the Pacific Ocean is expected to continue cooling slowly for the rest of the year, fueling the La Nina weather phenomenon, the U.N. weather agency said Monday. 
19990122132800000	GEOLOGIST FINDS EVIDENCE OF EL NINO IN ANTIQUITY. SCHENECTADY, N.Y. _ El Nino appears to have been an active climate force since the time human beings developed writing, a geologist theorizes in an article published Friday in the journal Science. The findings by a team of researchers add to a growing body of knowledge about the still mysterious El Nino, which has affected weather systems from South America to the U.S. Northeast. The findings could add to research into how El Nino may have influenced civilization, and what it could mean for the future of a warming planet. It wasn't an ancient Sumerian weather story that led Union College assistant professor Donald Rodbell to the discovery, but a 30-foot-long sample of mud taken in 1993 from Lake Pallcococha high in the Andes of Ecuador. The sample, originally drawn by Rodbell and colleague Geoffrey Seltzer of Syracuse University to study climate change associated with the last ice age, provided a natural archive of climactic information spanning 15,000 years. The core, after some initial study, sat in a refrigerator for three years until researchers began taking another look at it, particularly its unusual ``zebra stripes'' of light-colored layers. ``We didn't know exactly what we had,'' Rodbell said. ``In the back of my mind, I wondered if these patterns were somehow connected to El Nino.'' El Nino is the name given to the unusual warming of waters in the Pacific Ocean that affects wind and temperature patterns. While El Nino's effects have recognized for years, scientists until now have had only a few hundred years worth of written and anecdotal records to study, including when it began. The core gives what scientists say is the longest continuous record of El Nino activity. Every two to eight years, El Nino manifests itself in warm ocean currents off the western coast of South America, affecting, depending on its strength, weather systems throughout the Western Hemisphere. Effects include heavy rainfall in northern Peru and southern Ecuador, and unusually warm, dry conditions as far away as the northeastern United States and western tropical Pacific. The bands of light and dark sediment in the sample, scientists say, document El Nino's active and quiet years. The light layers reflect non-El Nino years, marked by relatively weak rainfalls, while the dark, organically rich layers were caused by heavy downpours that washed more vegetation from upland areas into the lake. Analysis with medical imaging technology found that El Nino appeared every two to eight years, the same frequency as today. The research team found that El Nino was weak to non-existent around the lake between 5,000 and 12,000 years ago, but as an accompanying article in Science notes, other new records from western Pacific corals and sediment from the Great Lakes show El Nino was in action 12,000 to 120,000 years ago. Scientists say that unlocking El Nino's secrets means more to humanity than knowing when to invest in umbrella stock. The torrential rains, according to at least one theory by archaeologist Daniel Sandweiss of the University of Maine, may have sparked temple construction and more complex civilizations, right after an El Nino lull that occurred from 5,000 to 8,000 years ago. While that theory had been challenged, the find appears to support at least his claim that the lull occurred. The world was also warmer in that quiet El Nino period, further pointing to a possible relationship between El Nino and global warming. IN December, scientists from the Woods Hole Research Laboratory in Massachusetts reported in the journal Nature that during El Nino years that bring hot, dry weather to the Amazon, Brazil's rain forest sends out more carbon dioxide gas, trapping heat in the atmosphere. How that might play out in a world where human activity is adding to the so-called greenhouse effect remains unclear. Rodbell, whose coauthors include scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the University of Massachusetts, and the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, cautioned that the results are only of one lake sample. He was recently awarded a two-year, $90,000 National Science Foundation grant to investigate other lakes in southern Ecuador.
19990202144600000	LEARNING TO FORECAST THE MYSTERIOUS EL NINO   &HT;. When 1998 began, East Africa should have been at its most beautiful. Normally the short rainy season ends in December, but this year was different. The rains were heavy and long. Camels, cows, sheep and goats all started dying of violent fevers. Soon people, too, began to get sick. The disease was Rift Valley fever, caused by an obscure mosquito-borne virus. It pops up every few years in Africa when standing water encourages mosquito eggs to hatch. At least 89,000 people caught the disease _ about 200 died _ and animal owners reported losing up to 90 percent of their herds. Yet catastrophic as the East African floods were, they had to jostle for the world's attention with other cases of strange weather _ with unusual occurrences of droughts, fires, rains, cold snaps and heat waves. Every year brings its own grab bag of such anomalies, but this year many of them could be linked to a phenomenon in the empty expanses of the equatorial Pacific _ a change in the ocean currents and winds that began in the early months of 1997 and that altered weather patterns around the world. The change in the weather was, of course, the work of El Nino. By the end of 1997, El Nino had already become a celebrity of sorts _ in storm-battered California, television news programs offered a tabloid flurry of El Nino updates. In 1998, however, El Nino's effects on the world came into full flower. It helped make the year the hottest ever recorded. In addition to Rift Valley fever, El Nino has been linked to an upsurge in diseases ranging from cholera to malaria to dengue fever, in Kenya, Cambodia, Peru and other countries scattered around the globe. Scientists are now trying to figure out how they can use this year's experiences to predict what the future will bring _ both in the next few months and in future decades. The good news is that they can now forecast an El Nino with some precision, and during El Nino years predict its effect on the world's weather months in advance. The bad news is that according to some research this latest El Nino might be a preview of the weather to come in the next century. In recent years, researchers have become better prepared for El Nino, thanks to the work of ocean modelers like Mark Cane and Stephen Zebiak of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. In the mid-1980s Cane and Zebiak wanted a miniature Pacific they could play with, a simulation in which they could shut off this wind or that current to see which factors were most important to El Nino's existence. They built a simple computer model, and almost as an afterthought they tried to use it to predict real El Ninos. It accurately predicted the onset of the next El Nino, in 1986; then, in the early 1990s, months in advance of each one, it predicted the onset of a string of El Ninos. Other scientists began building more sophisticated computer models. By late 1996 the new models had outperformed their predecessor. By the time the next El Nino arrives, scientists hope to be able to give much better forecasts. To that end, Lamont-Doherty and Scripps Institution of Oceanography have joined forces to create the International Research Institute for Climate Prediction along New York's Hudson River. Its 80 scientists will be dedicated to making climate predictions up to a year in advance. Much of their effort will have to go into making better computer models. Rather than relying on the historical averages of El Nino's behavior, they will be trying to simulate the whole shebang, from the initial slosh of the Pacific to the downpours in Kenya. Ultimately, the researchers hope to take what they learn about El Nino and use it to understand trickier oscillations in other parts of the world's ocean, such as the rise and fall of sea surface temperatures in the North Atlantic. That might make it possible to reliably predict climate many months in advance even in years without a big El Nino. There are signs, for example, that the power and the frequency of El Ninos may rise and fall according to vast cycles of the Pacific Ocean. It's clear that from decade to decade the nature of El Nino does change. From 1885 to 1915, for example, El Ninos were powerful, but from 1915 to 1950 they were minuscule. After 1960 they picked up again, and since the late 1970s they've been very big. The work of researchers, combined with El Nino's power this year, has made clear that it is far more than a matter of the occasional bad fish catch. El Nino represents the fickleness of a powerful ocean that can focus its energy on the world's weather with stunning swiftness. Cane and Zebiak have recently been studying the quirkiness of the Pacific on the scale of hundreds of thousands of years. One of the most startling things they've found is the ability of the ocean to sometimes shift abruptly into an El Nino-like pattern and then stay that way for thousands of years. Cane speculates that by behaving this way, the Pacific may go so far as to kick the planet in and out of ice ages. Cane himself admits that his extrapolating from today's El Ninos to the past may be ``outrageous.'' Extrapolating into the future is even more hazardous. Yet it's possible, and certainly worth contemplating, that someday El Nino will stop making the occasional visits we're now used to and settle in for a long, long stay. _______ &QC; &UR; (Carl Zimmer is a senior editor of Discover.) &LR;  &QL; _______ &QC;  &UR; (To purchase this special ``one-shot'' feature from DISCOVER magazine _ the rate is not prohibitive _ contact New York Times Syndicate sales representative DEBRA WEYDERT at (732) 390-4480; fax, 732-390-4697.) &LR;  &QL;
19990226145800000	LA NINA GIVES HER BROTHER RUN FOR HIS MONEY. SAN FRANCISCO _ La Nina, the assertive sister of last year's hellacious El Nino, has already contributed to freakish weather around the globe and will continue to bring colder than normal temperatures to the West Coast well into spring, according to government forecasters. La Nina refers to the phenomenon of rapidly cooling equatorial waters in the central Pacific. It ended the record El Nino event last May but has been just as disruptive as its brother, scientists say. It is blamed for flooding and heavy snow in the West, abnormally warm weather in the East and extreme weather from South America to Asia. ``This La Nina provides the physical link between many of the unusual weather patterns seen in far-flung parts of the globe,'' said John Janowiak, a scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. ``While parts of Alaska have experienced severe cold, most of the lower 48 states, especially those in the southern tier, have enjoyed record-breaking warm temperatures.'' Already, the still-strengthening La Nina pattern has built the Sierra Nevada's snowpack to record highs and sent Alaskan temperatures to record lows. And, forecasters say, still more snow in the next two or three months will stack up on top of a snowpack that already measures 478 inches at the Kirkwood ski resort in Alpine County, Calif. The snowpack is about twice normal in many areas and as high as last year's record El Nino year in most cases. El Nino is the name given to the unusual warming of waters in the Pacific Ocean that affects global wind and temperature patterns. Even with its nearly 40 feet of snow, Kirkwood is only the second snowiest site in North America. Mount Baker in Washington state has received a couple of feet more. The National Weather Service also predicts colder-than-normal temperatures on the West Coast through May, when La Nina may still be in force. The colder-than-normal sea surface temperatures have grown into one of the strongest La Nina episodes in 50 years, according to scientists at the weather service's climate prediction center in Camp Springs, Md. Temperatures in the lower 48 have been warmer than normal, with many states reporting among their warmest November-January periods ever. The United States as a whole had its third-warmest November-January period of the past 104 years. On La Nina's downside, huge storms with hurricane-force winds blasted Washington, Oregon and Northern California, and there has been flooding in some northern states. At the same time, wide areas of the Southwest are experiencing drought. La Nina's impacts include heavy rains, severe storms and flooding in southern Africa, drought in Kenya and Tanzania, flooding in the Philippines and Indonesia and abnormal wetness in northern South America. The extreme weather is just the opposite of the extremes those areas suffered during the 1997-98 El Nino.
19990416000000000	El Nino Helps Ocean to Trap Carbon Dioxide: Study. LONDON, April 15 (Xinhua) -- Despite causing anomaly of weather and climate, the El Nino event may help cut global warming by temporarily stemming the release of carbon dioxide from the Pacific Ocean, scientists suggested Thursday. Richard Feely and colleagues form the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) have found that during the El Nino years between 1991 and 1994, the release of carbon dioxide from equatorial Pacific Ocean was between 30 and 80 percent of that in 1996, a non-El Nino year. "El Nino clearly has a marked influence on the overall carbon dioxide flux," the researchers wrote in a letter to the British science journal Nature. The oceans exchange large amounts of carbon dioxide with the atmosphere each year. Areas where water is sinking absorb the gas, those where water is rising to the surface release the gas. The most important of gas-releasing areas is the equatorial Pacific, where is also the home of El Nino, the quasi-biennial warming event in the surface waters of the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean. It is estimated that the equatorial Pacific Ocean is the source of 72 percent of the annual flux of carbon to the atmosphere from the equatorial oceans. Scientists usually estimate how much carbon dioxide should be in the atmosphere by calculating how much fossil fuel is burned. But some 2 billion tons of carbon dioxide go unaccounted for each year. The NOAA team's new research helps explain the lower growth in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere during those years. The researchers have found that reduced carbon dioxide releases in the Pacific during El Nino could account for up to a third of this "missing" carbon dioxide.
19990421111513000	Global Warming Might Spur El Nino. Conditions like El Nino might settle in almost permanently if  global warming gets bad enough, making climate disruptions such as droughts or excessive winter rain essentially the norm, a computer study suggests. That might happen around the year 2050 if nothing is done to  control emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases, said researcher Mojib Latif of the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology in Hamburg, Germany. El Nino is a natural phenomenon that involves a surface warming  of the eastern and central Pacific Ocean around the equator. It happens every three to four years on average. It can disrupt climate around the world, producing extra rain in the southeastern United States and in Peru during the winter, while causing drought in the western Pacific, for example. The computer simulation suggests that unrestrained global  warming could set up the same kind of pattern in ocean surface temperatures, but as a more or less constant condition. Latif and colleagues report their findings in Thursday's issue  of the journal Nature. Essentially, the study suggests that the Pacific would warm more  in the east than the west. That's because the western part is already so warm that with further heating it would spawn clouds that provide cooling shade, Latif said. The El-Nino-like temperature pattern might be broken every five  years or so by a strong cooling like the periodic phenomenon called La Nina, he added. But Latif said scientists have ``a long way to go'' before they  can be sure the study's conclusions are correct. Gerald Meehl of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in  Boulder, Colo., agreed it will take more study to understand how global warming might affect El Nino. Studies have disagreed on whether the warming would produce the El-Nino-like Pacific surface temperatures, he said.
19990506140508000	La Nina-Tornado Link Eyed. Oklahoma's catastrophic tornadoes were influenced by La Nina,  the weather phenomenon 5,000 miles west of the prairie in the Pacific Ocean, scientists say. It's part of the same widespread weather trend that dumped a  record 91 feet of snow on Mount Baker in Washington this winter and triggered severe drought and wildfires in Florida. ``The signal is there,'' said Steve Byrd, science officer for  the National Weather Service in Omaha, Neb. ``The incidence of tornadoes on the central Plains is slightly higher during La Nina.'' La Nina refers to a large, unusually cold pool of water in the  equatorial Pacific Ocean that develops every several years, and influences weather patterns around the world. It works in reverse of the more common and better-understood El  Nino, which is a warming of Pacific waters. La Nina has generated a stronger, colder jet stream in the upper  atmosphere, while warm, wet air at lower levels has been pulled from the Gulf of Mexico into the Plains states. This combination generated the ferocious thunderstorms that  spawned dozens of twisters, including a historic F-5 tornado in Oklahoma City. An F-5 is the most powerful tornado there is. At least 41 people have died in Oklahoma alone as the result of the severe weather. The current La Nina has persisted for nearly a year. Most La  Ninas last only several months, and there are signs that this one is beginning to wane. The weather pattern comes on the heels of an El Nino that  dissipated in 1998. Studies suggest tornadoes were reduced by as much as 24 percent in some regions during the most recent El Nino. El Ninos increase storm activity in California and South America  while calming things down in the Atlantic and Caribbean. La Ninas, by contrast, reduce storms in California but stir up trouble in other parts of the country as well as in India and southeast Asia. This spring, meteorologists in Nebraska and Iowa already have  tallied 17 tornadoes -- five more than normal by early May. ``We're already living up to predictions,'' Byrd said.
19990630222014000	La Nina Seems To Be Vanishing. PASADENA, Calif. (AP) -- The weather-altering La Nina phenomenon  has all but vanished from the Pacific Ocean, according to NASA satellite observations. The pool of unusually cool tropical water marked by low sea  levels has shriveled and the equatorial Pacific is warming to normal temperatures, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said this week. Scientists cautioned that like its warm counterpart, El Nino, a  La Nina condition will influence global climate and weather until it has completely subsided. La Nina has shrunk several times and then had a resurgence over the past 12 months, they said. For the United States, an El Nino brings unusually warm  temperatures to the northern states and cooler, wetter conditions to the South. La Nina is linked to cooler conditions in central North America,  and dry, warm conditions in the southern states.
19990716000000000	Satellites Can Give Warning of Disease Outbreak in Africa. WASHINGTON, July 15 (Xinhua) -- Weather satellite data that detect warming in the Indian Ocean and the early signs of an El Nino in the Pacific may also give an early warning about an outbreak of Rift Valley Fever in Africa, according to a study by researchers. The study appearing Friday in the journal Science has linked the warming of Pacific and Indian Ocean waters with increased rains in Africa and the periodic outbreaks of Rift Valley Fever, a mosquito-borne disease that can kill humans and animals. Researchers at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland State of the United States and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Washington analyzed 50 years of weather and medical data to establish the connection between warm oceans, rains and the fever. "We discovered a cycle of Rift Valley Fever outbreaks that appeared to depend on rainfall," said Kenneth Linthicum of Walter Reed. "There were large outbreaks every seven to 10 years, but the virus apparently disappears between outbreaks." Assaf Anyamba, a Goddard researcher who uses satellites to study the oceans, said that East Africa gets more rain during an El Nino, but that this effect, alone, is not enough to prompt a fever outbreak. A fever outbreak is more likely to occur when the Indian Ocean warms at the same time as there is an El Nino, a phenomenon that includes the warming of Pacific Ocean waters. "When the western equatorial Indian Ocean is similar to the East Pacific in sea-surface temperature, there will likely be a large-scale outbreak of Rift Valley Fever," said Anyamba. Researchers said their study suggests that satellite data that measures sea surface temperature, along with measurements of vegetation growth in East Africa, could pinpoint areas where Rift Valley Fever outbreaks are most likely to occur. They said that satellite data could give a two-to-five-month warning of a Rift Valley Fever outbreak. This would give time to vaccinate livestock and to treat mosquito habitats with insecticides that are released upon flooding. This would prevent the mosquitoes from hatching and, thus, break the cycle of disease.
19990901124026000	Study Calculates El Nino Effect. WASHINGTON (AP) -- Overall the El Nino weather phenomenon of  1997-98 produced more benefits than destruction for the United States, according to a new analysis by climatologist Stanley A. Changnon. Here is his rundown of the good and bad, reported in the  September issue of the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. Bad Nino: --Lives lost, 189 including 65 in various southeastern tornadoes,  42 from February tornadoes in Florida, 28 in the Northeast ice storm, 24 in snow and rainstorms, 17 in California storms, 8 drowned in Texas, 3 drowned while snowmobiling in Michigan and 2 dead in a Minnesota tornado. --Property losses in storms, $2.8 billion. --Federal government relief, $400 million. --State assistance, $125 million. --Agricultural losses, $600 million to $700 million. --Lost sales in snow removal equipment, $60 million to $80  million. --Tourist industry losses, $180 million to $200 million. Good Nino: --Lives saved 848, including 757 who survived extreme cold, 14  who survived snow and ice storms, 57 who did not die in winter-related auto accidents and about 20 who were not killed by hurricanes, compared to recent ``normal'' years. --Reduced heating costs, $6.7 billion. --Increased sales of merchandise for homes and other goods, $5.6  billion as warm weather sent people to the stores to post a January-March retail sales record. --Reduced costs of removal of ice and snow from streets, $350  million to $400 million. --Reductions in normal losses to flooding caused by melting snow  and Atlantic hurricanes, $6.9 billion. --Income from increased construction and related employment, $450  million to $500 million. --Reduced operating costs to airlines and trucking industry, $160  million to $170 million.
19990902082741000	El Nino Not As Bad As Expected. WASHINGTON (AP) -- For a while it seemed as though everything  from tornadoes to toadstools and hailstorms to hemlines was being blamed on El Nino. Now, it turns out the periodic weather event produced a lot more good than bad. That's the conclusion of climatologist Stanley A. Changnon, who  calculated that while the 1997-98 El Nino can be blamed for 189 deaths, it also can be credited with preserving 850 lives that would have been lost in normal winter and hurricane seasons. And its $4.2 billion to $4.5 billion in damage is far outweighed  by nearly $20 billion in benefits, Changnon reports in the September issue of the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. ``If you treat it as an economic outcome for the country ...  most of the country benefited,'' Changnon said. True, the El Nino weather phenomenon was blamed for major storms  in California and, by some, for deadly tornadoes in Florida and an ice storm in the Northeast. But it also produced an exceptionally mild winter in most of the  Northern states and blocked Atlantic Coast hurricanes. ``I figured, just watching what was happening, that it was going  to be a zero-sum game but it turned out far from that,'' Changnon said in a telephone interview from his Mahomet, Ill., home. Michael Glantz, an El Nino expert at the National Center for  Atmospheric Research in Colorado, was skeptical. ``It's a noble attempt but I wouldn't take the numbers to the  bank,'' he said. ``I'm wary of trying to cost out weather events.'' In his paper, Changnon admitted there could be up to a 30  percent variation in the costs and benefits cited, but noted that would still produce considerably more benefit than loss. Jim O'Brien, director of the Center for Ocean-Atmosphere  Prediction Studies at Florida State University, welcomed Changnon's report. ``El Nino is a good dude for the United States,'' O'Brien said  in a telephone interview. ``In actuality, La Nina is worse for the United States, there are more hurricanes, there is an increase in tornadoes and they spread over a wider region ... there is drought,'' he said. El Nino is a periodic warming of the water in the eastern  Pacific Ocean, which shifts weather patterns arriving from that area and can affect the climate worldwide. La Nina, an abnormal cooling of the Pacific sea surface, is currently taking place. It, too, can affect the world's weather. La Ninas sometimes occur between El Ninos. According to Changnon, as few as 100 people died in winter cold  and storms during the 1997-98 El Nino, well below the average of 850 in recent years. Generally mild temperatures ``greatly reduced lives lost to  extreme cold,'' Changnon wrote, and there also were fewer weather-related auto accidents and deaths in winter storms. ``El Nino's influence on the atmosphere led to the elimination  of major Atlantic hurricanes during 1997,'' he added. That meant no lives lost compared to the average of 20 in recent years and it meant an enormous savings for home and business owners, governments and insurers. The mild temperatures also saved businesses and homeowners  millions of dollars they didn't have to spend on heating fuel, Changnon said, though that also can be calculated as a loss for utilities. Lack of demand for heating fuel made oil a glut on the market,  resulting in the price of gasoline dropping to as low as 80 cents a gallon in some parts of the country, O'Brien pointed out. In addition to the economic benefits of the mild winter,  Changnon reported, ``Thousands went out of doors more, millions went shopping, many altered their types of recreation, and almost everyone enjoyed better health than in normal winters.'' Glantz raised the ``question of what is a normal year, which no  one has defined. No one has calculated to the U.S. the cost of weather in a normal year. Extremes are going on every year,'' he commented. ``It's admirable that he tried to put numbers on this stuff,''  Glantz concluded, but ``it's very hard to attribute weather events.''
20000203190100000	Study Links El Nino To Diarrhea. LONDON (AP) -- After linking El Nino with illnesses such as malaria, cholera and dengue fever, scientists now have connected the climatic phenomenon with an increase in childhood diarrhea. The research led by the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health also suggests for the first time that gradual temperature increases related to global warming could foster outbreaks of diarrhea in children living in developing nations. Diarrhea kills as many as 3 million children under the age of 5 worldwide every year and sickens millions more, mostly in developing countries. It normally is more prevalent during the warmer seasons but, until now, experts didn't know whether a change in temperature could play a role. The study of 57,331 children in Lima, Peru, found that an increase in diarrhea cases between 1993 and 1997 was linked to even small rises in temperature, regardless of whether it was summer or winter. In fact, the effect was greater in winter, even though the weather was cooler. Overall, the study, published this week in The Lancet medical journal, found that for every 1 degree centigrade (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit) hotter than normal it became, 8 percent more children arrived at a local clinic for treatment of diarrhea. The findings were similar for the 1997-1998 El Nino period. The number of children brought to the clinic each day that winter was double what would have been expected for that time of year had El Nino not occurred, the study found. El Nino, which involves the equatorial waters in the Pacific warming up, creating unusual weather patterns around the world, increased winter temperatures in Lima by about 4 degrees centigrade (about 7 degrees Fahrenheit). A similar increase in temperatures brought on by El Nino in the summer was still connected to more diarrhea than usual, but the effect was not as strong, accounting for only a 50 percent rise in diarrhea cases, the researchers found. "The potential effect of global warming on disease is controversial," said William Checkley of Baltimore-based Johns Hopkins, who led the study. "This study suggests there may be something to it for diarrhea." It's plausible the researchers' findings could apply in countries other than Peru, said Dr. Tony McMichael, an epidemiology professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine who studies the effects of climate on disease. "In general, a large proportion of infectious disease agents are very sensitive to slight changes in climate," said McMichael, who was not involved in the research. "This would give us a reasonable indication of how diarrhea agents react to changes in temperature in general, whether in water or in food." Checkley said the stronger effect in winter could be due to the fact that the types of diarrhea common in winter and summer are different. In hot weather, diarrhea caused by bacteria or parasites is more likely. Cooler temperatures appear to enhance the transmission of viral diarrhea, he said. When the winters are hotter than normal, it could be that children are exposed to more sources of diarrhea, including the bacterial and parasite sort. El Nino also may prompt diarrhea-promoting behavior more common in the summer, such as more demand for water, the study said. Dr. Olivier Fontaine, a diarrhea expert at the World Health Organization, said the observed link makes sense. "This may be useful for developing strategies to combat the disease by intervening to prevent it," Fontaine said. "If we can predict a change in the weather, such as when El Nino cycles around, we could have all the interventions in place before the weather changes."
20000518000000000	El Nino Expected Later This Year or Early Next Year: Experts. BEIJING, May 18 (Xinhua) -- Chinese oceanographers today expect climatic repercussions on global weather as El Nino is expected to come sometime this year or the next. Wang Fei, director of the Marine Environmental Protection Department of the State Oceanic Administration, issued the warning today at a press conference on this year's marine disaster forecast. The conclusion was made by Song Jiaxi and his colleagues with the National Marine Environmental Forecasting Center in their annual marine disaster forecast report, which was released today. El Nino phenomenon, which comes at an interval of roughly four years, refers to abnormal temperature rises in tropical waters which normally leads to global anomalies in weather and climate. El Nino was blamed for the heavy summer rains in China, causing devastating floods in areas along the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River and northwest China in 1998.
20000925171000000	FORECASTERS IN SEARCH OF EL NINO AND LA NINA. For many parts of the Americas and Asia, the occasional warming and cooling cycles in the tropical Pacific Ocean known as El Nino and La Nina are unwelcome visitors _ barging in, usually with little warning, then staying for months or sometimes a year or two, bringing all kinds of baggage in the form of distorted patterns of storms and droughts, heat and cold. Now, after a record El Nino in 1997 and 1998, followed almost immediately by a prolonged La Nina, the tropical Pacific has shaken off its fever and chills and is expected for at least a year to be ``normal.'' So one might think meteorologists could relax a bit. But it is exactly the opposite, many of them say. Now they are sweating. With no El Nino or La Nina, there is no sheep dog driving the sheep, no strong organizing force giving shape to the otherwise chaotic flow of weather across the seas and continents. As a result, long-term forecasts _ the ones that help determine the price of oil or natural gas futures, the ones that determine how much road salt your town buys this fall _ are looking a bit like guesswork. ``Over the last three years, a lot of people have looked pretty sharp,'' said Dr. William C. Patzert, a research oceanographer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. ``Now the going gets tough.'' Oceanographers over the last 20 years have developed an understanding of how El Nino and La Nina form _ with changes in winds and atmospheric pressure allowing warm surface water to flow east in an El Nino or spreading cool water west in a La Nina. They have still not found a way to predict when one or the other will develop. For example, the El Nino that formed in 1997 and boosted global temperatures to record highs was unanticipated, as was its intensity. But once one of the conditions settles into place, meteorologists have become adept at predicting the consequences and incorporating those patterns into long-term forecasts. Normally, Patzert said, the surface temperature of the tropical Pacific varies only a few degrees Fahrenheit through the course of a year. An El Nino can raise surface temperatures 14 degrees above normal over an area three times the size of the contiguous United States. A La Nina can drop it nearly 8 degrees. More heat causes more evaporation and more rising hot air, meaning more storms. Cooler temperatures, Patzert said, create the equivalent ``of a stone in a stream,'' nudging storm tracks and the jet stream out of place. El Nino has been linked to strong winter storms that batter southern California, to a weak hurricane season in the Atlantic as high-altitude winds shear the towering tops from developing tropical storms, to searing droughts in southern Asia like the one that spawned enormous rain forest fires in Indonesia in 1997. A La Nina, among other things, seems to nurture Atlantic hurricanes, push the North American winter storm track further north, and bring heat and drought to the West. Without either, weather becomes typical _ meaning largely unpredictable _ meteorologists say. The government's long-term forecast maps for this winter retreat largely to what meteorologists call ``climatology'' _ essentially a tossup _ with most of North America given an even chance of having below average, above average, or average temperatures. Precipitation charts are a little less equivocal, but only a little. To point out just how fuzzy things will be in coming months, Dr. Tim P. Barnett, a marine physicist at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, described government predictions for his home town: ``For San Diego this winter, indicators range from extremely heavy precipitation to very dry, with all categories equally likely.'' He said meteorologists, if they are prudent, will likely include strong caveats in any long-term forecasts in the coming months. ``You just have to say that's the way it is,'' Barnett said. Without anything driving the system, he added, ``the atmosphere tends to be its wonderful chaotic normal self, and that makes forecasting very difficult.'' There are signs that this may not always be the case. Dr. John O. Roads, the director of the experimental climate prediction center at Scripps, said that new work is showing that there are plenty of other subtle influences on long-term weather that should eventually improve predictions, even in years without the strong influence from the Pacific. He said that soil moisture and snow cover appear perceptibly to influence seasonal weather patterns, adding that computer models at Scripps are beginning to incorporate some of these variables with some success. But it will be years before these forces are incorporated in official forecasts issued by federal climate prediction centers, he said. One place where the frontier of forecasting is already being pushed is at private forecasting companies whose predictions are sold to commodities traders, utilities, or other customers whose business relies on anticipating future weather. To prosper, these companies have to offer a product that is better than the government's forecasts. A false move can make or break a trader trying to anticipate the price of winter wheat or heating oil or natural gas, said Drew Lerner, a meteorologist for Bridge Global Weather Services, a private forecasting company in Overland, Kan. He said that he and his competitors have to look at subtler influences on weather, including things like sunspot cycles or soil condition in the Midwest or other less obvious temperature shifts in the Pacific and Atlantic. ``You take all these things and try to put it all together,'' he said. Among his predictions for this winter are a lack of strong storms along the Atlantic coast, colder than normal temperatures in the northern Plains and Great Lakes region, and abundant January precipitation from the lower Middle West to the mid-Atlantic seaboard. But it all would have been a lot easier if the last La Nina had stuck around a few more months, Lerner said.
