10000000000000000	Iran s nuclear capability Describe Iran s nuclear capabilities and nuclear testing   Also relate concerns of other countries about Iranian nuclear capabilities and their attitudes regarding development  testing  and deployment of Iranian  nuclear capabilities.
19970722175200000	Rafsanjani: Iran Is Committed to NPT. TEHRAN, July 22 (Xinhua) -- Iranian President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani said here today that Iran is committed to the human and Islamic principles and is not after the nuclear arms at all. The 64-year-old president declared that his country decisively supports the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and elimination of the ominous phenomenon of the nuclear war. Rafsanjani made the remark in a meeting with Hans Blix, Director of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). He said "Iranian nuclear programs are crystal clear and transparent and for humanitarian purposes. We always welcome sharing experience with respective international agencies." Blix appreciated the current cooperation between Iran and the IAEA, saying Iran allows the agency to inspect any nuclear center in Iran at any time. He said the various inspections of Iranian nuclear installation conducted by the IAEA indicated that Iranian nuclear capability is for humanitarian and peaceful purposes. Blix turned down the doubts by certain countries over Iran's purpose of developing the nuclear industry, saying the question is biased for political ends. "It is the natural right of any nation to acquire nuclear technology for the production of electricity, the manufacture of medicine, its application in the humanitarian areas and the protection of the environment," he was quoted by the official news agency IRNA as saying. Blix, who arrived in Tehran on Saturday, inspected a nuclear research facility in Bonab, in northwestern province of Eastern Azerbaijan. He said "the activities of Bonab nuclear research facilities is completely directed toward peaceful purposes and toward the economic development of Iran." Iran's nuclear industry is under constant scrutiny of the United States and Israel, which Tehran regards as two main rivals. Both Washington and Tel Aviv maintain that Iran is seeking to use nuclear technology for military purposes. The U.S. and Israel have even threatened to stage a preemptive air raid against the nuclear power plant in the southern port city of Bushehr, alleging that Iran plans to build an atomic bomb. Iran is finishing the power plant with help from Russia. Moscow has been under pressure from Washington and Tel Aviv to stop helping Iran finish the nuclear power plant which will be the first nuclear power plant in the Persian Gulf.
19980106095500000	Iran says it won't build nuclear bomb.
19980214000000000	Iran Does not Have Nuclear Capability: Russia. MOSCOW, February 13 (Xinhua) -- Iran has neither the technological capability nor the intention of making nuclear weapons, said Russian Nuclear Energy Minister Viktor Nikitovich Mikhailov on Friday. Mikhailov was responding to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's recent remarks indicating that Iran is making atomic weapons, the Interfax Agency reported. Iran is a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mikhailov said, adding that the IAEA has inspected the nuclear facilities in Iran many times but discovered no problems. And the minister stressed that the nuclear power station to be built by Iran with Russian assistance is purely for peaceful use. The United States and Israel, which suspect that Iran may want to acquire nuclear weapons, have opposed the Russian-Iranian nuclear cooperation. Washington has repeatedly asked Moscow to abandon its plan to help Tehran build a nuclear power station under an agreement between the two countries signed in 1995. Russia has so far refused to yield to U.S. pressure even though the U.S. has threatened to suspend economic assistance to Russia.
19980224000000000	U.S. Still Opposes Russia's Role in Iran Project. WASHINGTON, February 23 (Xinhua) -- The U.S. State Department reaffirmed its opposition Monday to Russian participation in the construction of a nuclear reactor in Iran. "We are opposed to any form of nuclear cooperation with Tehran, given its demonstrated interest acquiring a nuclear weapons capability," State Department spokesman James Rubin said. Last week, Russia confirmed its intention to complete work on the Bushehr nuclear power project and strongly denied U.S. allegations the plant could help Tehran build an atomic bomb. Russia said Iran's technological potential does not allow it to produce nuclear weapons. Rubin credited Russia with not cooperating with Iran on projects that could be the most dangerous in terms of nuclear proliferation.
19980307195800000	Iran: No Nuclear Agreement With Ukraine. TEHRAN, March 7 (Xinhua) -- Stressing that it has no nuclear cooperation program with Ukraine, Iran Saturday expressed "surprise" at Kiev's announcement to cancel a nuclear contract with it, the Iranian official news agency IRNA reported. "Iran has no agreement with Ukraine on manufacturing turbines for (its) nuclear reactors and it is surprising that Ukraine has made such a claim," Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi said at a press conference. Ukrainian Foreign Minister Gennady Udovenko said on Friday that Kiev has decided to annul a contract to supply turbines to the Russia-built Bushehr nuclear power plant in southern Iran. Russia's assistance for Iran in the field has triggered accusations from the United States and Israel that Iran is seeking the technology for developing nuclear weapons. It is noted Ukraine's move was made when U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright was visiting the country. Iran's nuclear activities are for peaceful means, Mohammadi said, stressing that it complies with international regulations and puts the nuclear activities under the supervision of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The baseless ballyhoos of the U.S. and Israel are aimed at blocking the development of other countries, which is their legitimate right, he said. He contended that Iran will not deprive itself of utilizing nuclear technology for its development drive.
19980422181600000	Iran Lambasts U.S. for Accusation Over Nuclear. TEHRAN, April 22 (Xinhua) -- Iran on Wednesday strongly lambasted the United States for its accusations against Iranian-Russian nuclear cooperation, accusing Washington of supporting Israeli nuclear programs. Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi said the accusations indicated the U.S. hostile attitude toward Iran, adding that the United States has spared no opportunity to stop Iran's economic development plan. "Iran's nuclear cooperation with Russia is fully for civilian application of nuclear energy and is taking place within the framework of international regulations," the Iranian official news agency IRNA quoted the spokesman as saying. Mohammadi said that Iran and Russia have been committed to controlling the export of the nuclear energy from either country in accordance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Russia is helping Iran build a 1,000-megawatt nuclear power plant in Bushehr, southern Iran. U.S. officials repeatedly accused Tehran of seeking access to technology to produce nuclear weapons through building nuclear power plants. Mohammadi also attacked Washington for providing financial assistance to Israel to modernize its military arsenal. He said that by accusing Iran of attempting to acquire weapons of mass destruction, the U.S. has attempted to justify its dangerous plan to arm Israel "which possesses weapons of mass destruction and is the main threat to the security and stability of the region." He reiterated that Iran always wants the Middle East free from weapons of mass destruction, urging the international community to pressure Israel to eliminate all its weapons of mass destruction and force the U.S. to abandon its dangerous policy of supporting the Jewish state. Meanwhile, reports reaching here said that Russian Minister of Atomic Energy Yevgeni Adamov on Wednesday also stressed that the nuclear cooperation between Russia and Iran centers on peaceful application of nuclear power. He noted that Moscow-Tehran cooperation fully observes the NPT and is under the supervision of Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
19980602184900000	WILL IRAN OR IRAQ BE NEXT TO JOIN NUCLEAR CLUB?. WASHINGTON _ After India and Pakistan, what is next? While the Clinton administration tried to stop the nuclear arms race in south Asia, senior officials turned their attention Monday to the next possible nuclear hot spot. Officials and independent analysts agree that Iran and Iraq are both scouring international markets for nuclear weapon materials, although Iran, the leader in the competition, appears to be several years away from having devices that work. The arms buildup on the Korean peninsula is less of a concern because North Korea, beset by financial problems, has curtailed its nuclear weapons program. But the officials in Washington admitted that events of the past three weeks have shown that the United States cannot prevent the rise of other nuclear states. A combination of threats and rewards did not stop nuclear tests by India and Pakistan. And economic sanctions will not sway Iran, which has no formal relations or trade with the United States. Officials at the State Department and other agencies disagreed over the most pressing issue: how to prevent India and Pakistan from turning nuclear devices into completed weapons that can be delivered by missile. While some in the administration are calling for the strongest sanctions possible, others argue that India and Pakistan need an incentive to stop their tests and join the community of nations committed to ending nuclear proliferation. ``We're at a loss over what to do,'' said an official familiar with the discussion. ``We have to show them that there's another avenue _ economic security instead of nuclear security.'' The debate has been complicated by federal laws requiring Clinton to impose rigid sanctions on countries that test nuclear devices. The sanctions can be lifted only with the consent of both houses of Congress. ``Unless there are some positive steps that India and Pakistan can take to get out of the sanctions, there's no point in having sanctions,'' said Tom Collina, a director of the Union of Concerned Scientists in Washington. At the same time, the Commerce Department argued Monday against fully applying economic sanctions against Pakistan, which said it conducted six nuclear tests last week. The officials warned that the government in Islamabad would retaliate against American companies that are engaged in multi-million-dollar energy projects and other businesses in Pakistan. Senior Pakistani members of Parliament also warned that prolonged sanctions might force their government to reconsider its allies. Ghul Sarwar Cheema, a retired Pakistani general who was involved in Pakistan's clandestine nuclear program for more than a decade, has suggested that Pakistan might share its nuclear know-how with other countries. ``For the moment, nobody is even thinking of doing that,'' he said in an interview. ``But necessity is the mother of invention. Don't force us, don't invite us, do not do it.'' For now, officials agree that both India and Pakistan should immediately stop testing nuclear warheads, halt missile tests, end the production of weapons-grade fuel, and join 149 other countries in signing the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. It all sounds quite logical. And that's the problem: Logic has failed since India's tests rocked the western state of Rajasthan on May 11. ``The United States has articulated a series of steps that, if taken, could cap the crisis right now and contain the damage,'' said Joseph Cirincione, a specialist on nuclear proliferation at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. But, he added, ``I am personally pessimistic about the ability of rational actors to influence the process at this point. Passions are running hot and heavy and there are many variables beyond anyone's control.'' Clinton cut short a trip to Texas to return to Washington to confer with Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright tomorrow morning before she joins foreign ministers of the five permanent United Nations Security Council members in Geneva to discuss the arms race in south Asia. Michael Krepon, president of the non-profit Henry L. Stimson Center, which studies arms control, said the turmoil in south Asia has overshadowed significant achievements of the past 15 years in halting the spread of nuclear weapons. The United States and the former Soviet Union have dismantled thousands of nuclear warheads. South Africa, a former emerging nuclear power, stopped its nuclear program before reaching weapon capacity. In South America, Argentina, and Brazil pulled back from the brink of a nuclear arms race. Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan have all agreed to rid their territories of nuclear warheads deployed during the Soviet era. Iraq's nuclear weapons program has been largely destroyed. Iran continues to raise the greatest concerns. In a 1994 speech in Washington, James Woolsey, then director of central intelligence, warned that Iran could become a nuclear state by the year 2002 to 2004. That estimate has been pushed back slightly, but Israeli intelligence services maintain that Iran might have a nuclear device as soon as 2001. In Washington, the National Council of Resistance of Iran, which opposes the regime in Tehran, said the government has been pursuing a nuclear buildup known as the ``great secret plan.''
19980605160000000	Pakistani minister tells Israeli media no nuclear cooperation with. JERUSALEM (AP) _ In a rare interview to an Israeli TV station, Pakistan's minister of information said Friday that his country was not cooperating with Iran on nuclear technology. 
19980607143900000	Iran: Navy Game With India Has No Nuclear Link. TEHRAN, June 7 (Xinhua) -- Commander of Iranian Naval Forces Abbas Mohtaj said on Sunday that the forthcoming joint Iran-India naval game has nothing to do with Iran's stand towards nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan last month. Mohtaj confirmed that two Indian vessels have arrived at Iranian territorial waters in the Persian Gulf to join a week-long drill with Iranian navy due to start on June 9, the Iranian official news agency IRNA reported. He added that the exercises are very elementary and of no operational significance because of the low number of vessels due to participate. The Iranian commander said Iran has already voiced concern and transparent view about the nuclear tests of both India and Pakistan, adding that Tehran supports the comprehensive test ban treaty and believes that any action by any country to carry out nuclear test is provocative. Iran has good relations with both Islamabad and New Delhi on diplomatic and defensive grounds, he added. India donated five nuclear devices on May 11 and 13, threatening to spark a round of nuclear arms race in the subcontinent. Pakistan, under great domestic pressure, conducted two rounds of nuclear tests in response two weeks later.
19980609073300000	Iran Denies Charges on Nuclear Technology Transfer. TEHRAN, June 9 (Xinhua) -- Iran has dismissed as a "baseless claim by the Zionist (Israeli) circles" the allegation that Iran had asked Pakistan to transfer its nuclear technology, the official Islamic Republic News Agency reported Tuesday. Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi in New York Monday said that Iran basically does not need such programs and has urged India and Pakistan not to involve themselves in nuclear test races. Mohammadi's remarks came after Israel called the nuclear devices detonated by the Pakistanis late last month in response to India's nuclear tests as "Islamic bombs." Iran, among the Islamic countries, has hailed the Pakistani nuclear explosions as Islamic world's deterrent Israel. The tests in south Asia triggered serious concern about the proliferation of nuclear technology in the Middle East region. Mohammadi said the real goal of Israeli accusations against Iran was to justify its dangerous nuclear capability and its ever growing stock of nuclear arsenal. The spokesman said the Israeli move was designed to procrastinate supervision by the International Atomic Energy Agency of its nuclear installations and the signing of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Iran believes that the strengthening of the NPT without any discrimination to include nuclear powers and Israel, is the best way to guarantee global peace, he said. Iran has repeatedly stressed the need to eventually make South Asia and the Middle East nuclear-free.
19980620000000000	Iran Denies Buying Chemical Weapons from Israeli. TEHRAN, June 19 (Xinhua) -- Iran on Friday dismissed as "baseless" the Israeli claim that it had bought chemical weapons parts and technologies from an Israeli arms trader. Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi said that such baseless claims by Israeli officials indicated Israeli uneasiness over Iran's diplomatic efforts made at the international arena to curb the danger posed by Israeli nuclear weapons. Mohammadi made the comments after an Israeli court convicted Wednesday Nachum Manbar, an Israeli businessman, of illegally selling biological and chemical weapons parts and knowhow to Iran for 16 millions U.S. dollars in the past years. Manbar is expected to be sentenced to life sentence on this charge. The spokesman accused high-ranking Israeli officials of spreading false rumors against Iran, saying Tehran is seriously trying to cleanse the Middle East from nuclear arms. He noted that the Israeli accusation coincided with Iran's successful efforts to pressure Israel on the nuclear issue. He added that Iran believes security would be restored in the Middle East region through controlling and curbing Israel's atomic efforts. He stressed that Israel can not legitimize its occupation even through its nuclear weapons. Mohammadi finally urged the International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct inspection of Israel's nuclear facilities. Israel is believed to be the only Middle East country that has acquired nuclear capability. Although western intelligence reports claimed that Israel has about 200 nuclear warheads, Israel has neither denied nor confirmed that it has nuclear weapons. Worried that its leading enemy Iran could acquire nuclear weapons that will threaten its safety, Israel has been launching an aggressive campaign around the world to prevent Tehran from obtaining nuclear technologies needed to build a nuclear bomb.
19980717154700000	Iran, Russia Urge Nuclear-Free Zone in Middle East. TEHRAN, July 17 (Xinhua) -- Iran and Russia Friday urge all countries concerned to take "practical and urgent measures" to establish a zone free of nuclear arms in the Middle East. The call was issued in a joint communique released here after two day talks between Iran and Russia on nuclear weapons, the Iranian official news agency IRNA reported. In the communique, the two countries acknowledged that the proliferation of nuclear arms and other weapons of mass destruction constituted threat to international peace and security. It said that the establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zones, particularly in the Middle East, should be encouraged as a top priority. The two sides demand the U.N. and other international organizations, including the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), play a vital role in creating such zones. They stressed that a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East region would considerably strengthen peace and security both at both regional and international levels. Expressing concern over the existing nuclear facilities in the Middle East, the two sides urged all regional countries, prior to the establishment of a nuclear-free zone, to show thorough restraint and not to develop, produce, or test nuclear devices. The communique called for the earliest possible accession to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of all states that have not signed it, particularly the countries in possession of nuclear facilities not subject to the IAEA safeguards. Meanwhile, Tehran and Moscow reaffirmed the inalienable right of states to acquire and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purpose, saying peaceful use of nuclear energy by the NPT states under the IAEA control could not cause damage to any other country. Russia expressed satisfaction with Iran's declaration that it was committed to the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and had no intention of obtaining nuclear weapons. The joint communique was apparently aimed at allying the fear among some countries, including the U.S. and Israel, that Iran is striving to acquire nuclear weapons and long-range missiles with the Russian assistance. Under the Israeli pressure, the U.S. Congress is considering to impose sanctions against Russian companies reportedly involved in transferring nuclear and missile technologies to Iran.
19980718000000000	Russia, Iran for Creation of Nuclear-Free Zone in Middle. MOSCOW, July 18 (Xinhua) -- Russia and Iran confirmed their commitment of non-proliferation and share an idea of creating a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, the Russian Foreign Ministry said in a press release on Saturday. Officials from the Russian and Iranian foreign ministries held consultations in Tehran on July 15-16 to discuss the problem of disarmament, non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and export controls, according to the Itar-Tass news agency. The two sides emphasized the need for non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and missiles for their delivery on the global and regional scale, the Russian ministry said. It was reported that the two countries after the consultations adopted a joint statement on a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. They stressed that the creation of a nuclear-free zone in the region would strengthen global peace and security both at the international and regional levels. The two sides proposed that the countries of the region should refrain from developing, producing, testing and acquiring nuclear weapons and from deploying them on their territory. At the same time, Moscow and Tehran confirmed the inalienable right of all countries to acquire and develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
19980722222000000	IRAN SUCCESSFULLY TESTS MEDIUM-RANGE MISSILE. WASHINGTON _ Iran successfully tested a medium-range missile on Wednesday, a senior administration official said on Wednesday night. The weapon, with a range of about 800 miles, is capable of hitting Israel and Saudi Arabia, and of altering the political and military balance of power in the Middle East, he said. ``This weapon would allow Iran to strike all of Israel, all of Saudi Arabia, most of Turkey and a tip of Russia,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Other officials said a U.S. spy satellite had detected the test on Wednesday morning, and that intelligence experts were still poring over data from the launching of the missile, which they believe Iran bought from North Korea. The officials are certain that Iran successfully tested the medium-range missile, but could not provide immediate information on the location of the launching site or the area where it landed except to say both were inside Iran's borders. A former intelligence official familiar with the spread of such weapons said: ``The major reaction to this is going to be from Israel and we have to worry what action the Israelis will take, because the Israelis clearly view the Iranians as their main threat in the Middle East.'' Israel is the only nuclear power in the region, and its missiles are believed to be capable of striking any nation in the Middle East. Iran is working on developing a nuclear warhead but is believed to be years away from building and testing such a weapon. But the United States is not certain of the size or sophistication of its programs to develop weapons of mass destruction. The test on Wednesday comes as the United States and Iran have been making cautious overtures toward improving relations, after a long chill. Just last month, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright praised President Mohammad Khatami, a moderate who took office last summer and who has confronted considerable resistance from religious and other conservatives. But Ms. Albright, in a speech devoted to steps for improving relations, also called on Iran to show evidence that it was not trying to develop weapons of mass destruction. The Iranian test tells the world about Iran's abilities, but not its intentions, officials said. ``This is a demonstration of Iran's perceived need to have the capability to threaten targets outside the immediate Persian Gulf area,'' one official said. ``It's now clear that they have the political commitment to seek that kind of capability.'' The test ``will not come as a big surprise to the Israelis,'' he said, ``because they've been following Iran's missile program very closely. ``And they know, and we know, that ability to test-fire a missile and the ability to develop, produce and deploy a large-scale force are two very different things. It could take years for Iran to achieve that capability and we have to do our best to retard that.'' Present and former intelligence officials said the missile came from North Korea, which has vowed to continue selling its weapons to any nation that can provide that cash-starved regime with hard currency. The official North Korean news agency issued a statement last month saying that ``our missile export is aimed at obtaining foreign money we need at present.'' U.S. intelligence officials say millions of dollars that Iran has paid North Korean is invested in more missile production rather than in civilian needs. Iran has long sought to launch a medium-range missile, and has bought technology from Russian and China as well as North Korea. Tehran's foremost goal, a senior administration official said, is not to strike its enemies but to be seen as a political and military force to be reckoned with in the Middle East. ``There is some prestige element here,'' he said. ``We have long thought that the Iranians believe that such a weapon would give them a reach inside the region, and that they believe that it serves their interests in terms of being a strong power in the Middle East.'' U.S. intelligence agencies have worked for years to track the development of Iran's weapons programs, and have traced shipments of technology from Russia, China and North Korea as well as attempting to learn what local military and technological capability Iran had developed. The former intelligence official said that government experts had expected a test by Iran, although the launch was not expected so soon. He also said that the test held political significance as well as military meaning. ``My guess is they purchased a very small number of these missiles, and that this is as much a political statement as anything, and that the statement is to Israel, and that statement is: `You are now vulnerable. You have to take us seriously.''' But he said he doubted that the Iranians meant to be belligerent toward the Saudis, saying ``They want to co-opt the Saudis, not threaten them.'' The Iranians have purchased technology for several ballistic missile programs in parallel, buying Russian and Chinese technology as well as North Korean technology, for many years. ``The important point here is that they have very little indigenous internal capability to make a real missile, and they've required extensive outside technical support,'' this former official said. ``But they've been willing to spend the money. I'd guess the Rodong would cost $10 million,'' referring to the North Korean missile. Militarily, Iran's purchase of a handful of the missiles from North Korea does not give Tehran a major war-fighting ability, he said. But it proves the Iranians have passed a milestone in military technology. ``In the long term,'' he said, ``the missile production assistance they've gotten from Russia and China will have the greater impact. But the Rodongs are the attention-getters.'' Iran has a well-established Scud missile program dating back to the war with Iraq of the 1980s. That war, a U.S. intelligence analyst said on Wednesday, ``gave them the experience of using missiles as a weapon of terror, both at receiving and delivering terror.'' In that war both nations attacked their opponent's major cities with short range missiles and Tehran was all but evacuated at times. Iraq's missile capacity has been the subject of a seven-year U.N. effort to eradicate weapons of mass destruction. U.S. officials said that they were certain only that Wednesday's missile test was successful, and the missile tested was similar or perhaps identical to the Korean Rodong missile. Beyond that, they were struggling on Wednesday night to analyze the meaning of the test. ``Whether they fired a Rodong missile themselves or whether they assembled a missile by reverse-engineering a Rodong _ either way, this is a North Korean missile with another name.'' said the senior official. The name Iran has give the missile, he said, is the Shahab-3. Administration officials contend that they have had some success in limiting Russian and Chinese military assistance to Iran. Russia said last week it was investigating nine companies for illegally providing weapons technology to Iran, and the United States imposed trade restrictions on those firms.
19980723233300000	EDITORIAL: IRAN'S MISSILE TEST. The New York Times said in an editorial for Friday, July 24: Iran's test of a missile that can reach Israel, Saudi Arabia and Turkey is a disturbing and dangerous development. Testing such an advanced weapons system, potentially capable of carrying biological, chemical and nuclear as well as conventional weapons to targets 800 miles away, heightens anxieties in an already tense Middle East. It also raises new doubts about whether Iran, despite the encouraging words of its moderate President, Mohammad Khatami, is actually turning away from threatening its neighbors and from developing weapons of mass destruction, two conditions for improved relations with the United States. Islamic conservatives strongly opposed to President Khatami's foreign and domestic policies still wield paramount power in Iran. That was further demonstrated by the harsh sentence for corruption and mismanagement imposed Thursday on Tehran's mayor, an important Khatami ally, and the shutting down of the country's most influential pro-Khatami newspaper. Washington must now try to divine what the missile test reveals about the power struggle in Iran and the ability of President Khatami to produce more moderate foreign policies. The Clinton administration's efforts to renew a dialogue with Iran should be pursued, but they must also be realistic. The administration also needs to initiate wider diplomatic efforts to curtail outside aid to Iranian missile programs. The missile tested Wednesday is based on a design imported from North Korea. But Russia and China have also repeatedly exported sensitive missile technology to Iran. Washington should demand that Russia and China tighten their export controls and punish violators. It should also press North Korea to end rogue missile exports. The administration ought to devote some attention to reassuring Israel, which considers Iran its most dangerous enemy and feels newly vulnerable. Syria already has missiles capable of reaching Israel; Iraqi Scuds did so during the gulf war, and now Iran may soon pose a missile threat. The immediate dangers facing Israel, however, have not substantially increased, and Israel should not act precipitously. Iran's new missiles are not yet operational, and Tehran remains at least five, and probably more, years away from developing nuclear weapons. That allows some time for arms control and diplomacy. Israel can also improve its regional security by pursuing efforts to negotiate peace with the Palestinians. Iran's missile test is a warning of future danger that should not be ignored.
19980925144300000	ISRAEL FRETS AS IRAN SPEEDS UP ITS MISSILE DEVELOPMENT. People in Israel are getting fairly perplexing bits of news about missile proliferation in their region. These usually come from the American government rather than their own. The biggest shock came in July, when the American Defense Department detected the test-flight of an Iranian rocket called the Shahab-3, whose 1,300-kilometer (800-mile) range could put Israel, and much of Saudi Arabia and Turkey, at risk. Some, but not much, reassurance was provided by the later news that the Arrow-2 anti-missile missile, being developed in Israel with American help, had this month intercepted and destroyed a computer-simulated target. For defense experts who are wrestling with the technical challenge of ``hitting a bullet with a bullet,'' the Arrow's success offered a ray of hope after a run of disappointments. A separate, all-American effort to develop an anti-missile shield for overseas troops and bases -- known as THAAD -- has been dogged by technical failures. But even the Arrow's most enthusiastic advocates acknowledge that it will not provide Israel with an impenetrable shield. And its success has done nothing to cool the tempers of Israeli strategists, arguing hotly about the system's price and purpose. Reuven Pedatzur, an Israeli airman turned political scientist, reckons that Arrow will cost many times more than its list price of $1.6 billion, without providing any guarantee against what he says is the real threat of the next decade: the fact that some of the missiles within range of Israel will be nuclear-tipped. He argues that instead of bankrupting itself with faulty shields, Israel should, if necessary, ward off the nuclear challenge by making public its own nuclear arsenal -- and its willingness to use it. Iran's test flight came as a nasty surprise to both America and Israel, indicating that the Iranians were at least a year further forward with developing missiles than hitherto believed. Curt Weldon, a Republican congressman from Pennsylvania who has championed the need for anti-missile defenses, believes the Shahab-3 may already be operational. The previous, cozy assumption of defense experts that some time must elapse between testing and deployment no longer holds good. Weldon also believes that as early as next year, Iran will be able to test (and presumably soon deploy) another system, the Shahab-4, with a 2,000-kilometer range that runs deep into Central Europe. Yet, even for Israelis, the most troubling recent development in missile proliferation was the news on Aug. 31 that North Korea had launched a three-stage missile, known as the Taepo Dong, which is apparently capable of reaching the western fringes of Alaska. On past experience, whatever rocket technology appears in North Korea will then spread rapidly to Pakistan and Iran. There is, of course, no simple correlation between the range of a country's rockets and the fear it arouses. For instance, the West is not particularly alarmed, at least for the moment, by the fact that Saudi Arabia has rockets that can go farther than any other in the region. Saudi Arabia's missiles were quietly obtained, during the 1980s, from China -- which, ironically, may have bought the technology from Israel. The states whose arsenals keep western and Israeli security people awake at night are Iran and Iraq. Although Iraq is banned under UN sanctions from deploying systems with a range of over 150 kilometers, it may have secretly saved a few of its old rockets from destruction -- and might be able to rebuild a medium-range missile capacity fairly rapidly once sanctions are lifted. After lobbying vigorously to stem the flow of Russian technology to Iran, Israel appears to have accepted that nothing is likely to stop the Shahab series of missiles from being developed. But it stresses the point that other countries besides itself could be in Iran's sights. ``The threat is not only to us, but to many others in the region,'' said Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel's prime minister, on Sept. 21. He might have added that Israel is probably not even particularly high on Iran's list of concerns. Iran has been impelled into missile-building by memories of its weakness during its war with Iraq in the 1980s, when it was unable to retaliate in kind to the Iraqi missiles that caused panic, and thousands of civilian deaths, among its urban population. Its immediate enemy is the Taliban in Afghanistan who have threatened -- albeit not all that seriously -- to deploy their Scud missiles against Iran. Even so, Iran's defense minister, Adm. Ali Shamkhani, is relishing the consternation that the missile test has caused. ``God willing, this will not be the only time that dedicated and mobilized workers of our defense industry surprise Israel's defense machinery,'' he gloated.
19980928115100000	Army chief: Israel must be ready for strike against Iran. JERUSALEM (AP) _ The commander of Israel's armed forces said Monday that Israel has to be ready for a pre-emptive strike against Iran, should this become necessary. 
19981026000000000	Iran's Defense Budget Unchanged over 4 Years:. TEHRAN, October 26 (Xinhua) -- Iran has said that it's defense budget has remained unchanged over the past four years and actually had a drop if taking the inflation into account. Keyvan Khosravi, press advisor to the Iranian defense minister, said on Sunday in an interview with the official news agency IRNA released on Monday that Iran's defense spending is driven by needs. He said that Iran has been able to maintain a proper defensive capability in spite of the low spending in the sector thanks in part to the country's reliance on domestic resources for its defense needs. Rejecting reports by some foreign media which claimed a 20 percent increase in Iran's defense budget, Khosravi said that "undoubtedly, Iran has the lowest defense budget among Middle East countries." The official did not mention the figure of defense budget in the current Iranian year (starting from March 21). But according to the budget approved by the Iranian Majlis (Parliament) in March, this year's defense budget stands at 2.89 trillion rials (1.65 billion U.S. dollars). Khosravi also refuted the recent remarks by a U.S. naval commander on Iran's capability to build nuclear weapons, saying that the International Atomic Energy Agency has consistently confirmed the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programs. Iran is a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the official said, adding that based on its convictions, Iran regards as inhuman the development of nuclear energy for non-peaceful purposes.
19981123173200000	Iran Reiterates Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy. TEHRAN, November 25 (Xinhua) -- Senior Iranian officials on Monday assured Russia that Iran will use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and will pose no harm to any countries. The assurance was made by Iranian Majlis (Islamic Consultative Assembly) Speaker Ali Akbar Nateq Nouri and First Deputy Speaker Hassan Rouhani in their separate meetings with visiting Russian Minister of Atomic Energy Yevgeni Adamov. It has become clear to the world that Iran, a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and a member of the Nuclear Disarmament Conference, is not after stockpiling nuclear weapons, Nouri said. Russia signed a contract with Iran in 1995 to complete the construction of the Bushehr nuclear plant in southern Iran, defying pressures of the United States, which has repeatedly attempted to convince Russia not to cooperate on the project. Washington warned that any kind of nuclear assistance to Iran could aid Iran's alleged nuclear weapons plans, but Russia argued that the plant is purely for peaceful purposes. Nouri criticized the United States for its opposition to Tehran-Moscow nuclear cooperation, saying that Washington is against, through every possible means, those countries which resist its expansionist goals. The Iranian speaker complained Washington's double standard in the nuclear non-proliferation issue. No objection has been made to Israel, which has acquired nuclear weapons but refused to join the international disarmament convention, because of U.S. support for that regime, he noted. Expressing satisfaction with Tehran-Moscow relations, Nouri said the two countries should strive for further expansion of their ties. He named oil, gas, plane manufacturing and technical fields as suitable grounds for Iran and Russia to promote their cooperation. In his meeting with Adamov, Rouhani said Iran is for a Middle East free of nuclear weapons within the framework of the NPT, expressing the hope that the agreements between the two countries will be implemented. Adamov briefed Iranian officials on Russia's measures to complete the Bushehr nuclear power plant. Since Russia is sure that Iran will use atomic energy for peaceful purposes, it resists pressures from a third country to cut cooperation with Iran, the Russian minister said. Adamov, who arrived here on Saturday, said that Russian political and parliamentary officials are firmly determined to expand multi-faceted cooperation with Iran.
19981127000000000	Official: Russia-Iran Nuclear Cooperation Conforms to NPT. MOSCOW, November 26 (Xinhua) -- Russia reiterated Thursday that its cooperation with Iran in the nuclear industry fully conforms to all international commitments of Moscow and Tehran, including those on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. Iran's activity in the nuclear sphere is being controlled by the International Atomic Energy Agency, which has not reported any violations on the part of that country, Foreign Ministry Spokesman Vladimir Rakhmanin said. Russian Nuclear Energy Minister Yevgeny Adamov has just returned from a visit to Iran, which is a signatory to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), Rakhmanin said. During Adamov's visit to Tehran, the two countries signed an agreement to accelerate the construction of a nuclear reactor in Bushehr and contemplate possible cooperation in building more nuclear power stations in Iran. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has recently criticized the Russia-Iran agreement as a threat to the entire region. He expressed hope that Russia will revise this initiative because, he said, it contradicts attempts to achieve peace and stability in the region, Interfax reported.
19981129124100000	Iran Rejects Israeli Allegation on Nukes. TEHRAN, November 29 (Xinhua) -- Iran has rejected as "unfounded" an allegation by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that Iran is seeking access to atomic warheads. Hamid Reza Asefi, the spokesman of Iranian Foreign Ministry, said Sunday the allegation was fabricated by Israel with the mere objective to divert the public opinion from dangerous schemes of Israel, "which has turned the region into a depot of nuclear weapons." Netanyahu voiced Israel's concern over Iran's nuclear programs after Tehran and Moscow signed a memorandum of understanding last Tuesday to promote their nuclear cooperation. Under the memorandum signed at the end of a visit by Russian Minister of Atomic Energy Yevgeny Adamov to Iran, the two countries will form expert groups to discuss building more nuclear power plants in Iran. "As the Islamic Republic of Iran has repeatedly announced, Iran-Russia nuclear cooperation is for peaceful purposes" and Iran carries out its peaceful atomic programs under the supervision of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the spokesman said. However, Asefi pointed out that Iran considers self-defense based on internationally recognized principles as its legitimate right. Russia is helping Iran build a nuclear plant in Bushehr in southern Bushehr province according to a contract concluded in 1994 between the two countries.
19990821171200000	Iran Denies Intention to Conduct Nuclear Tests. TEHRAN, August 21 (Xinhua) -- Iran's Defense Ministry and Armed Forces Logistics issued a statement here Saturday, dismissing a Turkish newspaper report that Iran intends to carry out nuclear tests. Iran fully adheres to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) on nuclear weapons, and all its atomic programs are based on "peaceful use of nuclear energy for medical, agricultural and energy-generation purposes" and "within the framework of the internationally-recognized absolute rights of any country." Tehran has been accused by the U.S. of being ambitious in pursuing non-conventional weapons capabilities, a charge which Iran has repeatedly denied. Iran is determined to stick to a principled policy of making Persian Gulf and the Middle East region free of non-conventional arms, including nuclear, chemical and biological weaponry, said the statement. "Despite Iran's location in an area where there are mounting nuclear challenges, the Iranian armed forces do not have any research program on use of nuclear energy for military purposes," it said. It attacked Israel for possessing a nuclear arsenal and refusing to subject it to international supervision.
19991007203500000	Iran Calls for Elimination of Nuclear Arms. TEHRAN, October 7 (Xinhua) -- Iran on Thursday appealed the international community for practical steps to reinforce the treaty on disarmament and for elimination of nuclear arms. The appeal was made by Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Legal and International Affairs Javad Zarif in Vienna, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency. As long as nuclear arsenal exists in the world, the Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) will not succeed, said the minister who was attending a three-day conference on Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) which opened in Vienna on Wednesday. The CTBT is a prerequisite for the NPT and the international community should take actions in safeguarding the peaceful use of nuclear technology, said the minister. The NPT should be used to reinforce disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear technology as well, he added. Iran has long been accused by the U.S. of trying to gain nuclear capability, a charge repeatedly denied by Tehran. Iran said it was pursuing peaceful use of nuclear energy in different fields, which is an inalienable right of any country in the world.
20000117144900000	U.S. Has Iran Nuclear Concerns. WASHINGTON (AP) -- The Clinton administration expressed new worry Monday over Iran's nuclear program and whether that country has acquired the capability to make nuclear bombs and other weapons of mass destruction. ``We will continue to work hard to block those efforts,'' White House national security spokesman David Leavy said. U.S. officials were not pleased with reports Friday from Moscow that Iran may order from Russia an additional three nuclear reactors for power generation. Although Iran denies having a nuclear weapons program, and Russia insists its assistance is peaceful and legal, administration intelligence officials view the Russian-Iranian relationship with rising alarm. The New York Times reported Monday that the Central Intelligence Agency has told senior Clinton administration officials that Iran might now be able to make a nuclear weapon. CIA Director George Tenet has been briefing other U.S. policy-makers on the new assessment, the newspaper said. National Security officials would not comment directly on the report but agreed that the possibility that Iran may be able to manufacture nuclear weapons has been a growing worry. ``We've said all along that we are concerned about Iran's efforts to develop ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction,'' Leavy said. Intelligence and defense experts warned that Iran may be closer than previously believed to amassing a nuclear arsenal. A senior intelligence official said the United States is watching closely the worrisome problem of availability of fissionable material to Iran, which could use it to make nuclear bombs. There remains disagreement among intelligence officials on the pace of Iran's nuclear program and the degree to which Iran may be attempting to divert nuclear materials to weapons. A reason for differing estimates, officials said, is the difficulty in monitoring Iran's acquisition of nuclear materials and technology. As recently as last year, intelligence officials were telling congressional intelligence panels that Iran might be able to test a missile that could reach targets in the United States by 2010. Officials now suggest the timetable might have to be shortened in light of the recent developments. U.S. efforts to persuade Russia to stop providing nuclear technology to Iran have met with little success. Russian engineers already are building a reactor at a site in southern Iran under an existing contract. Iran also has become a top customer of Russia's ailing defense industry with purchases of fighter jets, missiles, tanks and submarines. On several occasions, Congress has sought to impose sanctions on countries helping Iran develop nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, an intention aimed primarily at Russia. Israel has accused Russia, China and North Korea of selling Iran technology and expertise for its arms program, including attempts to build nuclear weapons and missiles to carry them. Pentagon officials as well as military-minded members of Congress have used the possibility of nuclear attacks from Iran, North Korea and other potential U.S. enemies as a major rationale for moving to develop a national missile defense.
20000922113100000	Iran Army Testing Skills Near Iraq. TEHRAN, Iran (AP) -- A day after test-firing a new long-range missile, Iran's regular army began its largest military exercises of the year Friday in mountainous terrain near the Iraqi border, state-run television reported. The three-day maneuvers in the western Kurdistan province were being supervised by top Iranian military commanders and involved airborne units and ground troops using radar interception systems, the broadcast said. The number of troops participating was not known. ''The maneuvers are aimed at testing the army's defense capability and its military might,'' the report said. The war games, code-named Zolfaqar-3, began a day after Iran test-fired its first solid-liquid fuel missile, raising concerns in Israel and in Washington that Iran is developing its long-range offensive missile capacity. Iran's Defense Minister Vice Adm. Ali Shamkhani said the Shahab-3D missile would be used for nonmilitary purposes, such as launching satellites, the Islamic Republic News Agency said. Shamkhani insisted Iran did not produce offensive weapons, the agency added. But in Washington and Israel, the test caused serious concern. ''We regard their aggressive efforts to develop missile capability as a serious threat,'' a State Department deputy spokesman, Philip Reeker, said Thursday. Israel's deputy defense minister Ephraim Sneh said that the missile development program, coupled with a parallel effort to build a nuclear warhead, spelled danger not only for Israel but for the rest of the world. ''This the second test in a short time. It's now obvious that Iran embarking on a colossal effort to build a long-range missile capability,'' he said. ''It means that in a few years time, Iran will be able to threaten with a nuclear weapon, a very broad part of the world.'' Iran has built and tested a number of missiles, including the Shahab-3 which has a range of 810 miles. Washington denounced a July test of the Shahab-3, which it said could reach Israel or U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.
