10000000000000000	crime and law enforcement in China Give examples of criminal activity in China  Name those involved  possible  What is China doing to fight crime.
19960502000000000	Crackdown on Crime Makes More Headway. BEIJING, May 2 (Xinhua) -- The nationwide crackdown on crime launched by the Chinese police has made marked headway in the last few weeks, information provided by the police shows. In North China's Shanxi Province more than 1,000 criminal gangs have been smashed, and 132 criminals were sentenced to death or life-term imprisonment at public rallies. In Datong city, police arrested 12 drug smugglers and abusers, and seized a batch of guns and ammunition. Police in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region crushed a major criminal gang engaged in producing and smuggling guns, seizing 49 such guns and more than 100 bullets. On April 6 police in Xining in Qinghai Province rounded up a gang operating out of the railway station, arresting 11 of its members and seizing 12 guns. On April 10 police in Chongqing City in Sichuan Province raided an underground gun factory, arresting four suspects and seizing 54 complete double-barrelled shotguns, 193 unfinished guns, 377 barrels, 259 butts and many tools for producing guns. On April 12 police in Gucheng County, Hebei Province, seized 20 guns and a quantity of ammunition from two people on a long-distance bus. The two were arrested and 19 more guns were found in their houses. On April 13 police in Quanzhou City, Fujian Province, arrested five people and seized 26 guns and 545 bullets from them. The crackdown on gun smuggling is a major part of the "anti-crime campaign" launched by the Chinese police. "We have been very successful so far," said officials of the Crackdown Campaign Office at the Ministry of Public Security. The campaign has also led to the solution of four major cases nationwide by the end of April, the officials said. On April 17, after 54 hours of investigation, police in south China's Guangdong Province finally hunted down a bank robber who had killed four people and stolen 143,000 yuan, 80,000 Hong Kong dollars and 270,000 yuan-worth of bonds and securities. The criminal, Liao Yanxiong, was executed Tuesday. In Dafang County, Guizhou Province, in southwest China, the police finally caught two people suspected of being involved in 28 cases of robbery and sexual harassment targeted at girl students living alone in rented accommodation. In Fuzhou City, capital of Fujian Province in east China, the police crushed a three-member gang responsible for 90 burglary and theft cases since June last year. In Zhejiang Province, also in east China, the suspects in seven cases of robbery and murder were finally tracked down by the police of Ningbo City.
19960516000000000	China's Nationwide Crackdown on Crime Fruitful. BEIJING, May 15 (Xinhua) -- Chinese police have solved a significant number of cases involving major criminal offenses, since the start of a nationwide anti-crime campaign on April 28. These included apprehending six people who were on the Public Security Ministry's most-wanted list, arresting some escaped criminals, and confiscating a large number of illegal firearms. In other developments, police in east China's Fujian Province have cracked a kidnapping case that involved a Chinese-American gang and one from Hong Kong, and a total of 1.3 million yuan (some 160,000 U.S. dollars). Police in Guangdong and Yunnan provinces joined hands in work on a drug smuggling case that involved a total of 600 kg of heroin. Thirty-nine drug traffickers were arrested and ten vehicles used to ferry the drugs were seized. In central China's Hunan Province, an eight-member gang of thieves who were connected with 141 thefts involving 370,000 yuan-worth of stolen articles, has been put out. Police in northeast China's Liaoning Province arrested a person who had killed and wounded three victims and been at large for ten years. Attempts to stop the manufacture and sale of firearms have been increased because of the obvious harm to society. In east and northeast China's Shandong, Liaoning, and Heilongjiang provinces, more than 8,000 illegal firearms have been confiscated in each of the provinces, and the numbers for Hebei, Hubei and Shanxi provinces are more than 3,000 each. A number of criminals have voluntarily surrendered to police as well. Over 600 escapees had given themselves up in central China's Henan Province, by May 6, and the number for Hunan Province stood at 490. A senior police official attributes these achievements in the nationwide crackdown on major crimes to the positive attitude and participation of ordinary citizens everywhere. Over the past two weeks, 80 percent of the criminal cases cracked in east China's Shandong Province, in fact, were the result of tips provided by citizens, and 45 percent of the criminal arrests came about because of help from the people. A high-ranking official pointed out recently that government at all levels should take this opportunity to improve rules and regulations, management, and precautionary measures in order to make the social order much better.
19960523000000000	China Puts Forward New Priorities for UN Anti-Crime Commission. VIENNA, May 22 (Xinhua) -- China today put forward proposals for organized transnational crime and international exchange and cooperation to be included in the priorities of a U.N. anti-crime commission. Zhang Fusen, head of the Chinese delegation, told the fifth session of the UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ) that China will participate in United Nations activities in crime prevention and criminal justice. The 10-day meeting has been called to assess and redefine the priorities of the CCPCJ. Zhang, the Chinese vice minister of justice, also proposed that drug trafficking, juvenile delinquency and economic crime should be included in CCPCJ's priorities. He said that in a bid to strengthen judicial administration, China has over the last few years passed new laws on the police, prosecutors, judges, prisons and lawyers.
19960916000000000	Five Criminals Executed For Hooliganism. BEIJING, September 16 (Xinhua) -- Five leaders of three hooligan gangs have been executed in China, Liu Jiachen, vice president of the country's Supreme People's Court, announced today. The executions were carried out in Shangqiu of central China's Henan Province, in Nanping of east China's Fujian Province and in Xianyang of northwest China's Shaanxi Province, yesterday and today. The five criminals were sentenced to death for committing such serious crimes as hooliganism, killing, theft and harming individuals. "Some hooligan gangs are well organized, having some characteristics of sinister gangs of the underworld, which are doing serious harm to society. It will be the focus of the crackdown against crimes in the next stage," Liu said. The number of criminal cases, especially those involving criminal gangs, has been on a steady rise in some areas of China in recent times. Usually they have the characteristics of large gang members, active in large areas, committing crimes frequently and doing serious harm to society, said Liu. China has been striking hard against violent crime, focusing on wiping out those endangering social security and public order. The crackdown against serious crime since April has effectively contained criminal activities and won widespread support from people.
19961213000000000	Chinese Crime-Stoppers Show Draws Large Number Of Visitors. BEIJING, December 13 (Xinhua) -- Thursday was the final day of a 43-day exhibition providing information on China's "Strike Hard" crime-fighting campaign that has attracted some 450,000 visitors. The show, which was held in a military museum in Beijing, was the biggest and longest show on crime ever held in China and got quite a lot of attention. Yesterday alone, it drew some 15,000 people, according to Beijing Daily. According to the Public Security Ministry, the seven-month national crackdown on crime has brought China's rising crime rate down, with 3.1 percent fewer crimes reported in the first ten months of this year. An accompanying "winter action" campaign has also started as a move to put a stop to anyone who might want to take advantage of the traditional Chinese Spring Festival, during the Chinese new year, when many people go to visit family members elsewhere and less public spirited people are driven to use that time to commit crimes. According to statistics, 12,435 criminal cases were handled in Beijing last year, 6,426 of which were major cases, resulting in arrests of 14,088 criminals, and 1,827 gangs being stopped.
19970331000000000	Judicial Guarantees for Human Rights Strengthened in China: Paper. BEIJING, March 31 (Xinhua) -- A white paper released by the State Council Press Office today says that, during the past year and more, China has taken many measures to strengthen the judicial guarantee for human rights. China has revised the Criminal Law and Criminal Procedure Law, promulgated and enforced new laws such as the Lawyers' Law and the Law on Administrative Punishment to strengthen the judicial guarantee for human rights during that period of time, the paper says. It has cracked down on serious criminal offenses in accordance with law, and earnestly guaranteed the people's human rights and safety of lives and property, it states. In 1996, public security and judicial departments launched, according to law, a severe nationwide crack down on criminal offenses seriously endangering public security, such as homicides, robberies, rape, kidnapping and blackmail, and major theft, with emphasis placed on crimes involving the use of guns, crimes with gangster connections and characteristics, and crimes committed by rogue and vicious social forces, it says. Statistics show that in 1996, courts throughout the country sentenced 322,382 criminal offenders who had seriously endangered public security by committing crimes of violence, crimes involving the use of guns, and gang-related crimes. The severe crackdown on crimes has safeguarded social stability and the human rights of the people all over the country, and won the heartfelt support of the general public, the paper claims. The paper notes that in March of 1997, China's Fifth Session of the Eighth National People's Congress made amendments to the Criminal Law enacted in 1979. The amended Criminal Law has 452 articles, an increase of 260 over the previous 192 articles. The amended Criminal Law has further defined three basic principles, namely "conviction and penalty according to law," "equality of everyone before the law" and "punishment commensurate with the crime." It stipulates: "there should be no conviction or penalty if an act is not explicitly defined as a criminal act by the law," "all criminal offenders are equal in applying laws," and that "the severity of penalty should be commensurate with the offender's crime and due criminal liabilities." These three principles have further improved China's principle of rule of law, and are conducive to judicial fairness and to the protection of the legitimate rights of the litigants, the white paper states. It points out that China has paid close attention to standardizing the practice of administrative and law-enforcement departments, so as to protect the citizens' legitimate rights from any infringement. Following the promulgation and enforcement of the Administrative Procedure Law and the Law on State Compensation, in March of 1996, China promulgated the Law on Administrative Punishment, thus standardizing in terms of system the act of administrative punishment by the governments, the white paper says. Meanwhile, the number of employees in the lawyers profession national exceeded 100,000 in 1996, who have become a major force in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of citizens, the white paper says.
19970501000000000	China Ready to Strengthen Cooperation in Combating Crimes. VIENNA, April 30 (Xinhua) -- China is ready to strengthen cooperation with other countries and international organizations in combating and preventing organized transnational crime, a senior Chinese official said here today. China's deputy minister of justice, Zhang Geng, made the remarks in a speech at the Sixth Session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. Zhang said that the Chinese government appreciates the efforts by the United Nations in crime prevention and criminal justice and has taken an active part in U.N. activities in the area. "We are ready to strengthen cooperation with other governments and international organizations and make our contributions to the joint efforts in combating and preventing organized transnational crime," he said. Zhang said that in the past few years, China's law enforcement authorities cracked numerous cases in southeast China involving killing, kidnapping and racketeering by members of criminal gangs which entered China from overseas. They also assisted police authorities of other countries in tracking down and arresting members of criminal gangs, he said. Zhang said that China amended its Criminal Law recently to enhance the fight against organized crime, money-laundering, terrorist crime, trafficking of illegal immigrants and environment-related crimes. The amended penal code will play a greater role in combating transnational crime after it comes into force on October 1, 1997, he said. By the end of 1996, China has signed 32 judicial assistance agreements with 25 countries and extradition agreements with six countries, Zhang said. "We have also cooperated with other countries with which no agreements have been signed on a case by case basis in the principle of mutual benefit," he said. Zhang said that the Chinese government is ready to expand its cooperation with other countries, including signing more agreements, on the basis of mutual respect for each other's sovereignty, judicial independence and dignity.
19970507000000000	hke- China Backs Cooperation in Fighting Firearms Crime. VIENNA, May 6 (Xinhua) -- China is backing the strengthening of international cooperation in fighting crime involving firearms, especially transnational firearms smuggling. The point was made today by Li Changhe, the deputy representative of the Chinese delegation, at the sixth session of the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. Li briefed the session on how China had tightened up the management of firearms, and the laws involved. He said China attached great importance to public security and personal safety. It had adopted resolute measures to fight the illegal manufacturing and smuggling of firearms. Li, China's Representative to the U.N. Office in Vienna, proposed that concerned U.N. agencies hold expert meetings to find measures of coping with all types of crimes. He called on the international community to exchange information and coordinate their actions in handling cases and to step up efforts in fighting crimes involving firearms.
19980608101300000	Police arrest three alleged 14K members, HONGKONG STANDARD. WASHINGTON, D.C. 20003 Tel: 202-547-4512 Fax: 202-546-4194 COPYRIGHT 1998 BY WORLDSOURCES, INC., A JOINT VENTURE OF FDCH, INC. AND WORLD TIMES, INC. NO PORTION OF THE MATERIALS CONTAINED HEREIN MAY BE USED IN ANY MEDIA WITHOUT ATTRIBUTION TO WORLDSOURCES, INC. 
19980710082100000	Chinese police chief refutes reports of crime mob cooperation. BEIJING (AP) _ Accusing foreign media of plotting to disrupt relations with Macau, a Chinese police chief has denied allegations his officers are linked to a wave of gang-related violence in the Portuguese enclave. 
19980712072400000	China urges Portugal to take steps against crime in Macau. BEIJING (AP) _ China urged Portugal Sunday to take tougher measures against gang-related crime in Macau to ensure the Portuguese colony's smooth handover to Chinese rule next year. 
19980723023000000	Gang headed by Hong Kong man broken up in China. HONG KONG (AP) _ Chinese authorities have broken up a gang led by a Hong Kong man suspected in a string of murders, kidnappings and the smuggling of explosives across the Hong Kong-mainland boundary, reports said Thursday. 
19980802175900000	CHINESE POLICE END THE REIGN OF `BIG SPENDER' AND HIS MOB. GUANGZHOU, China _ On a back street in this mangy city, where thick steam bubbles off woks at outdoor food stalls and mah-jongg tiles can be heard clacking late into the evening, a gang of Hong Kong mobsters often met in a well-guarded house to plot their most lucrative capers. The gang got its start years ago by robbing jewelry stores in Hong Kong, then retreating across the Chinese border to hide here because the local police were either too inept or corrupt to care. The gang's most spectacular crime came in 1996, police now say, by kidnapping the son of one of Hong Kong's richest businessmen and getting away with a staggering $125 million in ransom. The gang's leader, known as ``Big Spender'' for his habit of dropping a million dollars a shot at a favorite casino in the nearby Portuguese colony of Macau, seemed to typify the excesses of organized crime that flourished in southern China in step with an economic boom in the 1990s. Big Spender, whose real name is Cheung Tze-keung, may have been the most wanted man in Hong Kong, but in this part of China he became a folk hero for his apparent invincibility. Last week, after a series of brazen robberies, murders and kidnappings, Cheung's gang was officially pronounced dead. China's national police seized 32 people they described as his accomplices. They also seized nearly $5 million in cash, 11 luxury cars and a cache of explosives and firearms. Cheung was not only in custody, police said, but had confessed to the gang's role in murder, robbery, kidnapping and smuggling explosives. What Cheung actually said, and how he pleads, will probably remain as secret as other case files in China. The gang's downfall is the latest chapter in the curious evolution of lawlessness that straddles the border between Hong Kong and Guangdong province, an area with a rich history of secret societies, pirates and criminal intrigue. Perhaps it is a sign that Asia's mounting economic woes are hurting criminals, too. More likely, it is a kind of poetic justice for a singularly talented gangster and his crew, who had a remarkably long run before getting caught. For years, Cheung took advantage of the wide cracks that exist between distinctly separate law enforcement agencies in Hong Kong and Guangdong, which have long mistrusted each other's methods and principles. Bouncing back and forth over the border as it suited him, Cheung was able to capitalize on the poor communication between police on each side. Even since Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule last year, cooperation between the police forces has been limited. Now, however, the tables have turned on Cheung. This time he is likely to fare worse from the cross-border confusion, not better. Ordinarily, Hong Kong police ask for the return of a Hong Kong citizen who commits crimes in Hong Kong but is arrested in Guangdong. But this time, Hong Kong police have raised no objection to seeing Cheung's case handled in Guangdong, where being charged is a virtual guarantee of being found guilty and where the penalty for any serious violent crime is usually a swift execution. Were Cheung to be tried in Hong Kong, he would have at least have a chance at acquittal, a trick he pulled off once before on an armed robbery charge. Zhang Xingfeng, director of the criminal investigation bureau of Beijing's Ministry of Public Security, said Cheung's major crimes were planned in Guangzhou, so his case will be handled by the Guangdong provincial authorities. Many of the plans were made, Zhang said, in one of 50 properties owned by Cheung and his gang. In addition to murder and kidnapping, Zhang also said, the gang had smuggled more than 1,500 pounds of explosives from Guangdong into Hong Kong. Of the gang members, 18 were Hong Kong residents and 14 were from mainland China, Zhang said. Just over half were arrested here on July 22; the rest were apprehended on July 29. ``All of the arrests were made in the mainland after six months of investigations carried out with the support and cooperation of the Hong Kong police,'' Zhang said at a news conference in Beijing. Yet Cheung himself was actually apprehended in January, after a tip from an informer led police into a long cat-and-mouse chase that ended in Jiangmen, a city south of here, where Cheung was caught trying to escape in a taxi cab. Hardly the image of the hard-nosed, tough-jawed outlaw that dominates a popular genre of Hong Kong gangster movies, Cheung is a slight man with a gently protruding forehead. Apparently enjoying the image of fancy cars and fast women that comes with his territory, Cheung reveled in his aura of invincibility in 1995, when Hong Kong's High Court acquitted him on a technicality from an earlier conviction for armed robbery of an armored truck at Kai Tak Airport. He had served 18 months in prison, apparently leaving him with such serious grievances against the prison authorities that his gang was suspected when a bulldozer suddenly demolished a prison guard house one night. The next month, the home of Hong Kong's secretary for security was fire-bombed. Hong Kong newspapers also reported that Cheung was behind a bizarre plan to kidnap Anson Chan, Hong Kong's chief secretary, as a way to win the release of a fellow gangster, Yip Kai-foon. The plan was apparently foiled. Of all the gang's crimes, the most astonishing one was undoubtedly the kidnapping of Victor Li, the son of Li Ka-shing, Hong Kong's most powerful businessman, in May 1996. Apparently fearful of more kidnapping attempts, neither father nor son has ever spoken publicly about the kidnapping. Yet Hong Kong media have reported that the Li family paid a ransom of one billion Hong Kong dollars, worth $125 million, without telling the Hong Kong police. Chinese police confirmed Cheung's role in the kidnapping and the $125 million extortion. Police also argued that the crime was planned in Guangzhou, justifying a prosecution here, even though it was carried out in Hong Kong. Cheung, as the kidnapping's mastermind, awarded himself 40 percent of the take, or roughly $50 million, and split the other $75 million among nine associates, a Hong Kong newspaper reported In a second high-profile kidnapping in September 1997, Cheung took half of the $80 million extorted from the family of another property tycoon, Walter Kwok of Sun Hung Kai Properties. Chinese accounts of Cheung's downfall suggested that it grew out of the cooperation of a gang member. The Hong Kong media have also reported that some Hong Kong property tycoons had quietly expressed their concern about the danger of kidnapping in Hong Kong by cross-border gangs to China's President, Jiang Zemin. Whether Cheung's arrest came about by pressure on the police from Jiang, by a rare case of successful cooperation between Guangdong and Hong Kong police, or simply by a lucky break, may never become public. But Big Spender's days are over.
19980826121900000	More arrested for gang-related Hong Kong money laundering. HONG KONG (AP) _ Law enforcement officers staged about two dozen raids and arrested 15 people for alleged money laundering in connection with a cross-border gang, police said Wednesday. 
19980902000000000	Survey: China Serious about Public Security, Situation Disturbing-2. The recent internal shake-up inside judiciaries and their efforts to ensure justice have also been fruitful, and have won applause from the public, Cao said. However, the present security situation is still "rather serious," legislators said. They said criminal rates are rising; the problems of murder, robbery, explosion, thefts are prominent; prostitution, gambling and drug-related social vices persist despite repeated police raids; gang crimes, juvenile delinquency, and felonies perpetrated by migrants are sharply increasing. Chinese police have intensified their fights against criminal gangs and smashed many since 1996, but the public have reported that such gangs are still spreading in number and influence, they said. According to statistics, 60 percent of suspected criminals landing in the hands of police are now minors. Inspection teams also proposed several solutions for the worsening situation. They are: -- The "Strike-Hard" drive must continue to curb the rising crime rates; -- The community-level security network must be spread and instituted all across the country, because surveys have found those places with poor security are also lax in enforcing this system; -- And, most importantly, leaders at all levels must first realize the present situation and never slacken their work of comprehensive management of public security.
19980908072700000	Explosions in Macau street injure 14 police, journalists. MACAU (AP) _ Bombs blamed on gangsters exploded Tuesday in the violence-rocked Portuguese enclave of Macau, wounding four senior police officers and 10 journalists, authorities said. 
19981023024100000	Reports: Reputed Hong Kong crime boss had plans for more. HONG KONG (AP) _ A reputed Hong Kong crime boss who reportedly has admitted to participating in the kidnapping of two of the territory's wealthiest businessmen also claims he had plans to kidnap more, a newspaper said Friday. 
19981024040900000	Reports: Police chief steps up security amid reported gang threats. HONG KONG (AP) _ A police chief of a southern Chinese city where a reputed Hong Kong crime boss is on trial has stepped up security following assassination threats by gang members, Hong Kong newspapers reported Saturday. 
19981103000000000	Public Order Improving, General Situation Still Stark: Legislator. BEIJING, November 3 (Xinhua) - A senior Chinese lawmaker said here today that public security in some areas has taken a turn for the better thanks to comprehensive public-order regulations, but the general situation is still disturbing. Cao Zhi, vice-chairman of the National People's Congress (NPC) Standing Committee, China's top legislature, made this statement after concluding a legislative inspection tour to Hainan, Jilin and Jiangsu provinces, and several municipalities and autonomous regions. In a report to the ongoing session of the NPC Standing Committee, he said local governments are basically maintaining social stability and causing people to feel safer by employing measures for years to mobilize community forces and help the police prevent and crack down on crime. "Especially in coastal areas where there used to be quite a number of public security problems, the general security situation is obviously better," he said. Without the comprehensive measures taken these years, Cao added, the present security situation would be "much worse". Nevertheless, crime rates are still on rise; the problems of murder, robbery, explosions, and theft are prominent; prostitution, gambling and drug-related social vices persist despite repeated police raids; and gang crimes, juvenile delinquency, and felonies perpetrated by migrants are increasing, according to the senior lawmaker. Chinese police have intensified their fight against criminal gangs and have smashed many in the past two years, but the public reports that gangs are still growing in number and influence, he noted. Statistics from the Ministry of Public Security say that in the first six months this year, police nationwide handled 833,000 criminal cases, up 21.6 percent over the same period last year. Cao proposed several solutions for the worsening situation: -- The "Strike-Hard" drive must continue to curb the rising crime rates; -- The community-level security network must be spread and instituted all across the country, as surveys have found that those places with poor security are also lax in law enforcement; -- And, most important, leaders at all levels must first become aware of the present situation and remain assiduous in the comprehensive management of public security.
19981113025200000	Lawyer will fight death sentence for Hong Kong crime boss. HONG KONG (AP) _ The Chinese death penalty handed down to a reputed Hong Kong crime boss violates terms of Britain's handover of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, according to a lawyer who said Friday he will seek international help to spare his client's life. 
19981126002400000	Report: Officials asked mainland to spare Hong Kong convicts. HONG KONG (AP) _ As a reputed local crime boss fights his death sentence in China, reports Thursday said Hong Kong officials had previously asked mainland counterparts to consider sparing the lives of territory residents convicted of capital offenses in China. 
19991123000000000	Asian Countries Seek Effective Crime Prevention. NEW DELHI, November 23 (Xinhua) -- Procurators, justices and crime prevention officials from 28 Asian countries gathered here on Tuesday to seek improvement of mutual cooperation in their fight against crimes in the region. Speaking at the opening ceremony of the Seventh World Conference of Asia Crime Prevention Foundation (ACPF), Deputy Procurator-General of the Supreme People's Procuratorate of China Liang Guoqing called for enhancing cooperation among Asian countries to fight crimes and set up a crime prevention regime. The conference, with the theme of Effective Regional Cooperation in Crime Prevention and Crime Justice in the next millennium, is scheduled to discuss and foster strategies and viable approaches on crime prevention. With the world moving toward multi-polarization and integration and exchanges among countries on the increase, Liang said, crime has also become international in nature. Asian countries are faced with the common challenge of combating criminals who flee from one country to another and gang up with local criminals, he said. Therefore, he added, it is imperative to enhance cooperation among countries so as to set up a crime prevention regime. He informed the delegates that China has signed legal assistance agreements with 28 countries and extradition treaties with 10 countries. China is ready to exchange experience in preventing and penalizing crimes with all countries, especially those in Asia, he said. Liang also gave a brief account of the procuratorate system in China and the practice and experience of Chinese procurators in the field of crime prevention. Opening the meeting, Indian Law Minister Ram Jethamalani said New Delhi favors creating international pressure against countries which give credence and shelter to criminals and various groups indulging in violence, arson and other unlawful activities. "You can not fight crime at international and global level if a criminal of one society becomes an honorable guest elsewhere and is extended best of hospitality," Jethamalani said. Without naming any country, the minister said perpetrators of crime should not be given "shelter" in any country. ACPF, a non-governmental, non-political and non-profit organization founded in 1982, strives to promote sustainable development, peace and stability in Asia and the world through mutual cooperation and more effective crime prevention, criminal justice policies and practices.
19991123204600000	MACAU'S FLAMBOYANT CRIME LORD SENTENCED TO 15 YEARS IN PRISON  (DW). MACAU _ In a last act of justice before it turns this compact colony over to China, a Portuguese court here convicted a 45-year-old Chinese man on Tuesday of leading a powerful criminal organization that infiltrated Macau's casinos and terrorized its government. The court found the man, Wan Kuok-koi, guilty of loan-sharking, money laundering and other charges stemming from his reign as the undisputed lord of the Macau underworld. Declaring that Wan had shown no remorse, Justice Fernando Estrela sentenced him to the maximum term of 15 years in prison. Seven of Wan's associates, including his brother, Wan Kuok-hung, received lesser sentences. The trial of Wan Kuok-koi has mesmerized this Portuguese enclave on the southern coast of China in the twilight of its colonial rule. For the Portuguese, it represented a last bit of housecleaning before it turns Macau over to the Chinese government on Dec. 19. For Macau's Chinese population, it represented perhaps the last chapter in the saga of the man known as Broken Tooth Koi. ``The Portuguese are doing this to show the world that they finally did something about organized crime,'' said Joao Severino, the editor of Macau Hoje, one of the few Portuguese-language newspapers left in the colony. ``But there will be big trouble every night after this.'' Previous convictions of organized crime leaders in Macau have led to ugly explosions of violence. Tuesday, the authorities were taking no chances. A police sharpshooter squinted from the roof of a building across the street from the courthouse. Inside, security troops from Portugal, clad in bulletproof vests, ringed the austere courtroom as Estrela read the verdict in a matter-of-fact, almost subdued, tone. As the guards surrounded Wan to lead him out of the court, he began hurling abuse at the judge, prosecutors, and the police in Chinese and Portuguese. ``You're corrupt, you've taken dirty money!'' Wan shrieked, jumping on a bench and gesticulating wildly. Finally Wan subsided, and seeming close to tears, he was manacled by the guards and led away to begin his sentence in a high-security prison on a nearby island. The Portuguese authorities have been anxious to see Wan sentenced ever since he was arrested on May 1, 1998, the same day that his gang allegedly planted a bomb under the car of Macau's police superintendent. With his flamboyant style and theatrical boasting about his gangland exploits, Wan had symbolized Portugal's inability to stamp out organized crime in its last colonial redoubt. The mayhem threatened to overshadow Macau's return to China, embarrassing Portuguese administrators and provoking clucks of disapproval from senior Chinese officials. Local officials contend that the violence has been exaggerated by the Hong Kong news media and that the gangs originally came from Hong Kong and Guangdong Province in the Chinese mainland. ``The police here are fighting a very particular type of organized crime,'' said Jorge Rangel, Macau's secretary for public administration. ``It won't go away, just because of the handover.'' Still, many people believe the Chinese government will do a better job of snuffing out criminal activity, in part because it plans to station army troops in the territory. Chinese courts have also dealt more harshly with suspected gang leaders than Portuguese courts. Cheung Tze-keung, a Hong Kong crime boss known as Big Spender, was executed last December after being convicted of kidnapping and arms trafficking. Although Wan's gang, called 14K, is suspected of drive-by shootings, car bombings and attempted assassinations of public officials, prosecutors tried him on less serious charges, which carried the maximum sentence of 15 years. For his part, Wan contended he was a businessman and a high-roller who had no idea why he was on trial. With his squat build, round face and loud tropical-print shirts, Wan looks like many of the weekend wagerers who jam Macau's down-at-the-heel casinos. But he inspired deep fear among people here _ not least the prosecutors and judges whose job it was to go after him. The first judge in the trial resigned, so the government drafted Estrela from Portugal. Estrela, a tough disciplinarian, professed to be unfazed by the defendant's fearsome reputation. Yet the judge, too, took unusual precautions during the monthlong case. At lunchtime Tuesday, people in front of the court saw the judge dash to his waiting car flanked by armed bodyguards.
19991125000000000	China to Continue Crackdown on Economic Crime: Report. BEIJING, November 25 (Xinhua) -- China is still facing the difficult task of fighting corruption and economic crimes, according to a report recently released by researchers from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. The report on China's social situation said that although the Chinese government's position against corruption is firm, corruption, especially bribery, is still widespread and in some places severe. "From January to September of this year, 756 major economic criminal cases, involving a total of 3.87 billion yuan (466 million U.S. dollars), were reported by China's customs officials alone," the report said. Some middle and high-level officials have been involved in many of the country's white collar criminal cases, it said. According to the report, the government will make greater effort to crack down on corruption, smuggling and other economic crimes as well as criminal acts in the new year.
19991209000000000	Criminal Gang Members Arrested in Foshan. FOSHAN, December 9 (Xinhua) -- Members of a criminal gang in Foshan City of south China's Guangdong Province, which was controlled by a larger and more notorious gang in neighboring Macao, have been apprehended by local police. Police arrested 28 people who have been involved in more than 30 cases of blackmail, gambling, illegal use of guns and other crimes. The gambling cases involved more than 50 million yuan ( about six million U.S. dollars) of illicit money. Police also seized a number of guns and ammunition, including eight military pistols. The gang was established by Zeng Qiqiang in 1996, as a branch of the "Shuifang Bang," a large criminal gang in Macao. The gang in Foshan, with more than 100 members, used to help the "Shuifang Bang" run its gambling operations and collect money from people by force. To date, the provincial public security department of Guangdong and the local police in Foshan have completely uprooted the gang which seriously threatened the security of Foshan and Macao.
