10000000000000000	Burma government change 1988 What are the main events and important personalities in Myanmar  formerly Burma  leading up to and the government changed in September 1988.
19980115000000000	More Armed Group Members Surrender in Myanmar. YANGON, January 15 (Xinhua) -- At least 20 more members of various anti-government armed groups in Myanmar surrendered to the government last month, the Mirror newspaper reported Thursday. These members, who "exchanged arms for peace" in the southern, eastern and south-eastern areas in December 1997, belonged to the Kayin National Union (KNU), All Burma Students' Democratic Front and some other ethnic armed groups. They brought in some arms and ammunition, the report said. According to a latest official disclosure, a total of 15 anti-government ethnic armed groups have made peace with the government, leaving only one, the KNU, still in insurgency.
19980301000000000	Myanmar Arrests 40 Persons for Attempted Terrorist Acts. YANGON, March 1 (Xinhua) -- A high-ranking Myanmar military official said Sunday that the authorities made timely arrest of 40 persons in January, who allegedly attempted to commit terrorist acts in the country. In a press briefing here Sunday, Colonel Kyaw Thein, head of the Office of Strategic Studies of the Myanmar Defense Ministry, said the terrorist group, led by Ko Thein of the All Burma Students' Democratic Front (ABSDF), plotted to launch bomb attacks against some civilian targets. The ABSDF is an anti-government student organization operating on the Myanmar-Thai border sine November 1988.
19980727151000000	BURMESE MILITARY'S DIRTY MISSION?. In the decade since they seized power and renamed the country Myanmar, Burma's military rulers have become increasingly dependent on the use of forced labor and torture to maintain that power, build the country's infrastructure, and carry out its war against stubborn resistance by ethnic minorities. Now, evidence is increasing that the Burmese army is using another tool of war against minority populations: rape. The use of rape as a weapon in ethnic conflict is not uncommon; it's been documented in Bosnia, Rwanda, and, most recently, Indonesia. But such occurrences in Burma on a vast scale have received little attention, in part because the rapes have been perpetrated in inaccessible areas. The US State Department reported this year that Burmese troops ``continued to impress women for military porterage duties, and there were many reports of rape of ethnic minority women by soldiers.'' According to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Myanmar (Burma), government troops have been abducting ``increasing numbers of women, including young girls and the elderly'' and subjecting them to rape and other abuses. The Burmese Women's Union alleges that ``women have been raped in an organized and systematic way'' by the army. A civil lawsuit filed on behalf of Burmese citizens in a US federal court in 1996 targeted the Burmese military junta and two oil companies -- Unocal Corp., then based in Los Angeles, and Total of France -- for abuses allegedly committed during construction of a natural gas pipeline in Burma, charging that ``girls and women have been raped in the presence of family members.'' The court, which ruled last year that Unocal and Total could be held liable for rapes committed by their military partner, will hear the case next year; the junta was dropped as a defendent because the court said it had no jurisdiction over a foreign government. The UN Commission on Human Rights says women most likely to be raped are refugees, internally displaced women, and women belonging to ethnic minorities or the political opposition. Rapes by the military typically occur during raids on villages; when women are abducted for forced labor; during encounters with victims of forced relocations in the jungle; and in coerced marriages. Rape is systematically being used by Burma's military as part of a policy of ethnic cleansing, according to interviews with human rights workers and exiled pro-democracy officials. Bolstering those contentions is a new report by EarthRights International, a legal rights group based in Washington and Thailand, that accuses Burma's military of ``the savage domination of women outside the scope of acceptable wartime conduct.'' The report also says that ``the violent sexual abuse of ethnic Burmese women at the hands of the military occurs in epidemic proportions.'' Activists are urging the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women to investigate the claims of systematic rape. Thaung Tun, deputy chief of mission at the Burmese embassy in Washington, denies there is anything to investigate. ``It is hardly possible for rape to occur in Myanmar on a policy basis. Maybe on an individual basis. But if it happens, there are laws in place, and people would be punished.'' Many of Burma's soldiers are teenagers, often abducted by the army. According to EarthRights, they are given little food, forbidden contact with their families, and forced to beat each other for punishment. Abused physically and humiliated every day, the young recruits are then set loose among the ethnic minorities they have been indoctrinated to believe are ``the people's enemy'' and ``internal destructionists.'' Many ethnic leaders and pro-democracy activists claim that the violence against women is directly related to the military's goal of wiping out all ethnic resistance, even if it means genocide against a particular minority. One widely circulated document -- whose origin remains unverified -- appears to lend credence to the claims that rape is a conscious tool of war in Burma. Marked ``top secret'' and dated only a few weeks after the military takeover in 1988, the document is addressed to ``All Great Ruling Burmans'' and outlines a policy of ``blood mixing'' and ``Burmanization'' of ethnic minorities -- a reference to the process by which Burmans, who now represent two-thirds of Burma's population, could become more dominant. The document says ``the easiest way to implement these ideas is to occupy (marry or impregnate) women who are not Burman,'' for which it offers a financial reward. ``We must deviously attack those who are not Burman in economic as well as social ways,'' the document states. In Burma, children are considered to bear the ethnicity of the father only. Burmese opposition leader Sein Win -- an elected member of the Burmese parliament who now heads the country's government in exile -- believes the document originated in the defense ministry's department of psychological warfare. ``Regardless of the source or intent of this document, it accurately represents an ethnic cleansing policy of the Burmese military,'' he says. ``There is no doubt that the widespread rapes by troops are fueled by the policies expressed in this document.'' U Bo Hla Tint, a minister of the government in exile, says he was present in Burma when officials in Karen state heard the text of the document during routine monitoring of radio communications between two Burmese military commanders. Ka Hsaw Wa, a veteran Karen human rights investigator who organizes fact-finding missions for Human Rights Watch, says he encountered the ``Burmanization'' document in the Shan, Karen, and Karenni areas, where his sources retrieved it from Burman soldiers and outposts. Although it is impossible to gather precise statistics about the incidence of rape as a tool of the Burmese military -- geographical, military, and cultural barriers make that impossible, say human rights workers -- anecdotal evidence continues to mount. In April, Amnesty International reported that a 30-year-old mother, Nang Ing, was raped by three soldiers who accused her of giving rice to the insurgents. After the assault, they poured boiling water over her. She died three days later. In another village, a woman named Naing Mai was raped over five days by military personnel. She was then burned to death, according to the account that local farmers, who watched from hiding places, later gave Amnesty International. According to a report last month from the Shan Human Rights Foundation, Aye Nang, another young mother of three, was raped by troops on March 5 in the village of Wan Pek. She was then stabbed four times in the chest and buried in a shallow grave, uncovered by villagers three days later. Jennifer Green, staff lawyer with the New York-based Center for Constitutional Rights, is convinced that the Burmese military is guilty of crimes against humanity as defined by the UN war-crimes tribunal in The Hague. The tribunal, set up for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, has declared rape a war crime. ``The facts presented in (the EarthRights report) indicate that these acts of violence against women are both widespread and systematic, that there is a pattern of rape, and that civilians are targeted for political reasons or because they are part of a certain ethnic group,'' says Green, who is a cocounsel in the lawsuit against Unocal and Total. ``There is a growing acceptance that rape is not just a form of humiliating treatment but is an extreme form of violence and should be regarded as torture.'' &QL; Dennis Bernstein, associate editor at Pacific News Service, is the producer of ``Flashpoints'' on KPFA radio in the San Francisco Bay Area. Leslie Kean is coauthor of ``Burma's Revolution of the Spirit'' and director of the Burma Project USA in San Rafael, Calif.
19980731151000000	AN INTERVIEW WITH BURMA'S AUNG SAN SUU KYI. Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese Nobel Peace laureate, may be the most spied-on, or surveilled, human being on earth. The SLORC _ State Law and Order Restoration Council _ which took over Burma in 1988 and changed its name to Myanmar, sees Suu Kyi as a primary threat. She heads the country's popular opposition movement and, given her personal charisma and extraordinary family history, she has a strong claim on the allegiance of the Burmese people. Suu Kyi's father, Aung San, led a successful battle against British colonial rule in 1947. He was assassinated that same year at age 32, when Suu Kyi was only 2. Aung San remains a legend and a national hero in Burma. There are statues of him, streets named for him and museums of his life. His image is featured on Burmese currency, the one-kyat bill, which the SLORC yanked from circulation. His portrait on this bill greatly resembles his daughter. Pro-democracy protesters have adopted the note, which is worth less than a penny, as their flag of freedom. It has come to be known as the ``democracy note.'' ``I could not, as my father's daughter, remain indifferent to all that was going on,'' Suu Kyi told an audience of 500,000 at the beginning of her ``revolution-of-the-spirit'' campaign for democracy in 1988. This was soon after a bloody takeover by the SLORC in which thousands of demonstrators were massacred in the streets. In the 1990 elections, her party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), won a landslide victory _ even though was under house arrest. The triumph was considered a vindication for Suu Kyi, whose was placed under house arrest. In her most famous essay, ``Freedom From Fear,'' released in 1991, Aung San Suu Kyi explains the necessity for individual transformation to bring about real change, and writes: ``Among the basic freedoms to which men aspire that their lives might be full and uncramped, freedom from fear stands out as both a means and an end.'' For a while, after being released, Suu Kyi was able to give speeches at her front gate every Saturday and Sunday, answering questions the people submitted to her. Undaunted by roving military-intelligence video cameras and the imminent risk of arrest, thousands of Burmese would sit on old newspapers and plastic bags on the sidewalk to cheer, laugh and listen to the lady. But the junta then banned these gatherings and since mid-1995 has kept Suu Kyi under de-facto house arrest. The authorities have arrested hundreds of her party members and prevented Suu Kyi from meeting with journalists and diplomats. If they leave her house, her bodyguards and assistants face being hauled off to one of Burma's horrific prisons. When awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 _ while again under house arrest _ Suu Kyi was cited by the Nobel Committee as ``one of the most extraordinary examples of civil courage in Asia in recent decades.'' The SLORC _ buoyed by billions from Burma's booming drug trade and foreign investment _ shows no intention of turning over power peacefully. Further repression and major bloodshed loom on the horizon. Still, Aung San Suu Kyi and her followers remain steadfastly committed to the path of nonviolence. This interview was conducted by telephone in January 1997, shortly after a violent incident in which Suu Kyi was in her automobile, en route to visit pro-democracy supporters. A mob of thugs _ some throwing stones, some wielding iron bars _ surrounded the vehicle and smashed the windshield. It was, the world press noted, in an area controlled by government forces, who did nothing to intervene.  &UR; -0- &QL; Q: The attack on you and your colleagues in your car was a serious threat to your security. What were your thoughts in that moment when your car was being attacked? SUU KYI: It was quite interesting. (She laughs.) I was fairly detached. I saw it all as an observer. There were all these faces crowding in toward the car, and there was one man in front with an iron bar in his hand, who I assume was the one who made the big gash in my windscreen. I just said, ``Keep moving'' _ I made the decision that we were simply going to continue on to meet the crowds that had come to support us. One of the boys who was in the car with us was a bit angry about the whole thing, so I spent some time calming him down and telling him not to be angry. But it was clear to us that the attack was a deliberate attempt to harm us badly or even kill us. It is, of course, very serious. But we do not consider our own personal safety as any more serious than the safety and security of the people in general. Q: In the United States, some cities and the state of Massachusetts have chosen not to do business with companies that deal with Burma. Is this an effective means of supporting democratization in Burma? SUU KYI: Very much so. We would like to see more of this. It's consumer power. It's good to know that the people of different countries are really concerned and involved in the movement to help Burma. I think in some ways it's better to have the people of the world on your side than the governments of the world, even if governments can be more effective in certain directions. Q: In November '96 the SLORC launched a tourism campaign called ``Visit Myanmar Year.'' Are you still calling for tourists to boycott Burma? SUU KYI: Yes, my mind has not changed in any way. I still oppose ``Visit Myanmar Year'' and I'd ask tourists to stay away. Burma is not going to run away. They should come back to Burma at a time when it is a democratic society _ where there is justice, where there is rule of law. They'll have a much better time. And they can travel around Burma with a clear conscience. Q: In Burma today there is an increasing availability and use of heroin on college campuses. Why is that? SUU KYI: The government appears to be more interested in stamping out political activity than drug addiction. Very few university students on the campus could get away with engaging in political activities, but they seem to be able to get away with taking drugs. We have heard that it is very easy to obtain drugs on the campuses. Q: Why do you think the heroin used by students is sometimes nicknamed ``freedom from fear'' _ the same name as your famous essay? SUU KYI: Perhaps it means that the only way the students can escape from the fear of the repression of the government is by taking drugs. That would be very sad, wouldn't it? Q: Burma provides 60 percent of the heroin imported to the United States, and many of the ethnic peoples are financially dependent on the opium crop. Do you think crop substitution in the areas where poppies are grown would be an effective way to fight addiction? SUU KYI: Yes, it's one way. But basically I think that in order to do something like that, you have to win the confidence of the people, and I don't think you can win people's confidence through intimidation and repression. First we would like to talk to the people concerned and discuss the problem with them. That is what democracy is all about. You talk over your problems with the people because the people are involved in the whole process of government. As for the National League for Democracy, we are of course against the proliferation of drugs because we recognize that they are harmful, not just for our own people but for people all over the world. Certainly a democratic government would do its best to make sure that the growing of opium is eliminated in this country and that the people who depend on growing opium for their life will find other ways of earning a living. Q: There is a burgeoning AIDS epidemic in Burma. Reports describe shooting galleries that service 200 addicts with one needle. Have you heard about this problem, and do you have plans for dealing with the underlying causes of AIDS? SUU KYI: We do hear that AIDS is on the increase, and that's partly due to the fact that the authorities never really attack problems at their source. They seem to think that if they insist the problem does not exist, it will simply go away. The best way to deal with AIDS is through education. So we need a really widespread AIDS education program. In fact, what we need in Burma is education of all kinds _ political, economic and medical. AIDS education would be just one part of a whole program for education, which is so badly needed in our country. Q: What do you tell people when they get discouraged? SUU KYI: We are confident that our cause will prevail because that is what the great majority of the people in Burma want. We all want justice and human rights. Since what we want will benefit all the people in Burma, our cause is bound to win. Q: How much personal danger do you feel? Have you been threatened that if you leave your compound or try and speak to the people, you will be in trouble or you might be imprisoned? SUU KYI: I haven't been told anything like that, but of course the official papers are always talking about ``annihilating'' our forces. (She laughs again.) But we don't think about that too much. There's no time to be thinking about such things. &UR; (Leslie Kean, who writes regularly on Burma, is co-author of ``Burma's Revolution of the Spirit: The Struggle for Democratic Freedom and Dignity'' (Aperture, 1994). Dennis Bernstein is an associate editor with Pacific News Service and is the co-host of ``Flashpoints,'' a public-radio news magazine in the San Francisco Bay area. This interview is excerpted from a longer version in The Progressive.) &LR; ------------ &QC;
19980808152400000	10TH ANNIVERSARY OF BURMA CRACKDOWN PASSES QUIETLY. BANGKOK, Thailand _ The 10th anniversary of a crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators passed quietly Saturday in Myanmar without the violence many had feared, but also without any sign of a resolution of the country's deepening problems. Foreign diplomats and a government official said there were no demonstrations, after warnings from the government and a reported call for calm by the opposition party, the National League for Democracy. ``I drove past some key points this morning, including the university and the NLD office and I didn't see any additional riot police or troops or any additional security measures anywhere,'' said a diplomat in the Burmese capital of Yangon, once known as Rangoon. A statement faxed to The Associated Press said: ``There are no demonstrations in Yangon or anywhere else in the country. Though the anniversary passed quietly, there could be stepped-up activity in the coming two weeks by the opposition, led by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. She has set Aug. 21 as the deadline for convening the National Assembly, which was elected eight years ago in a vote that was annulled by the military after her party won 80 percent of its seats. Since then the military rulers have systematically harassed and imprisoned the elected opposition members and their supporters, and have choked off any attempts at public protest. Fearing student unrest, authorities have closed the country's universities for almost eight of the past 10 years. Kent Wiedemann, the top American diplomat in Myanmar, said the opposition was ``clearly taking the initiative at this moment'' in an effort to force some liberalization. ``There's a principle involved: yes, they want to have the election finally recognized,'' Wiedemann said of the Aug. 21 deadline. But practically speaking, he said, the immediate goal of the opposition is to bring the country's leaders into talks. The military leaders have said repeatedly that they are only caretakers and that they want to make a transition to democracy. But their refusal to honor the results of the 1990 election has raised questions about their intentions. And they have shown no sign of softening. ``As you can see, looking at the events of the last week, the government, rather than heeding the call for dialogue, is instead adopting a more confrontational attitude,'' Wiedemann said. He referred to stepped-up harassment of the opposition party's elected members of Parliament, the stifling of public protest and the forced return of Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi to her home on Wednesday after she was halted attempting to visit party members outside Yangon, and in a standoff spent six days in her car.
19980820055500000	Myanmar military won't convene parliament as deadline looms. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) _ Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi offered Thursday to end her road side standoff with the military government if the government agrees to release jailed members of her political party. 
19980910042500000	General accuses Suu Kyi of working with terrorists. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) _ While Myanmar's military government continued its arrests of the country's democracy activists, a top general accused Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi of working with terrorists, state-run newspapers reported Thursday. 
19980911022500000	Britain: Suu Kyi not citizen as Myanmar renews deportation threat. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) _ The British embassy in Yangon denied allegations in Myanmar's state-run press that opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi is a British citizen, while military-run newspapers on Friday renewed threats to deport the Nobel laureate. 
19980911060500000	Dissidents urge Thai army chief to call off visit to Myanmar. BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ Exiled dissidents from Myanmar urged Thai Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai on Friday to reschedule a trip to Myanmar by his top general because it will coincide with the anniversary of the military government's takeover. 
19980911064500000	Myanmar opposition says authorities detain 187 more members. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) _ Myanmar's military government has detained another 187 members of pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi's party, bringing the total to 702 arrested since a crackdown began in May, the party said Friday. 
19980913073600000	Vice chairman of Myanmar opposition party threatened with arrest. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) _ The vice chairman of Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi's political party was threatened with arrest in a commentary in a government-run newspaper Sunday. 
19980918023900000	Exiled students protest at Myanmar Embassy in Thailand. BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) _ On the tenth anniversary of the military takeover in Myanmar, about 60 exiled dissidents protested in front of their country's embassy in Bangkok on Friday calling for the release of political prisoners and arrested students. 
19980918125100000	Burmese refugees stage protest against military rule. DHAKA, Bangladesh (AP) _ Nearly 50 Burmese men, women and children demonstrated in the capital on Friday against military rule in their country. 
19981020130600000	SANCTIONS ARE JUST ONE FOREIGN-POLICY TOOL. Much of our energy at the State Department is spent encouraging foreign governments to act for what we perceive to be the common good _ dissuading regional rivals from provocative acts, promoting economic reform, blocking destabilizing transfers of arms and technologies, urging the release of political prisoners and advocating the development of democratic practices and institutions. We do this to prevent conflicts, build prosperity and strengthen the forces of freedom. But to succeed, we must convince foreign leaders that the common good is good for them as well and that our own agenda is aboveboard. Obviously, we do not use the same approach with an established modern power that we use with a government whose authority is weak and institutions wobbly. We consider the domestic pressures that may be affecting a government along with the proclivities and capacities of its leaders. And in any relationship, we refer constantly back to our basic principles and goals. For example, there has been much debate about whether we are more likely to influence the actions of ornery foreign governments by using the carrot of engagement or the stick of sanctions. The answer, of course, is that it depends. Neither China nor Burma is democratic, and both take a dim view of dissent. Yet we are engaged in a strategic dialogue with China while maintaining far tougher sanctions, including an investment ban, against Burma. Some accuse us of having a double standard. In reality, we have a single standard based on our assessment of the approach most likely to achieve results that serve U.S. interests and ideals. In Burma's case, a repressive military regime has rebuffed repeated appeals for talks with the democratic opposition led by Nobel Peace Prize-winner Aung San Suu Kyi. Under the junta, Burma has become, with official connivance, the world's leading source of heroin and, with official neglect, the epicenter of a regional AIDS crisis. Many of its increasingly desperate people are fleeing to neighboring countries. The democrats, who overwhelmingly won Burma's last free elections, have called for a halt to foreign investment and many categories of aid. Political change is essential if Burma is to transform itself into a source of stability in Southeast Asia. Sanctions may well work. Having driven the economy into the ground, the regime desperately needs foreign investment, loans and aid. By denying these benefits _ and encouraging others to do the same _ we may eventually persuade Burmese leaders to rethink where their own best interests lie. America's stake in China is far deeper and broader than in Burma. Asian security, nonproliferation and economic health cannot be won without Chinese cooperation. Our task is to encourage China to become a full and fully constructive participant in the international system. Our approach is to engage in a dialogue with Chinese leaders while encouraging the broad exchange of information and ideas between American and Chinese citizens. Unlike Burma, China is changing rapidly. The government is committed to economic reform. On proliferation, China has progressed from advocating the spread of nuclear weapons to signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention while agreeing to tighten controls on sensitive exports. In the political sphere, China has placed a new emphasis on the rule of law, permitted somewhat more open public discussion of political reform, released several prominent dissidents and ratified one international human-rights convention while promising to sign another this fall. In contrast to Burma, many Chinese reformers welcome Western political and commercial engagement with their government as a spur to further openness and change. Moreover, the Dalai Lama, among others, has praised the U.S.-China dialogue as an appropriate way to express American support for preserving the cultural, linguistic and ethnic heritage of Tibet. Critics are right to say that this progress is not good enough. That is why President Clinton spent much of his time during the Beijing summit working on the hard issues: urging China to do better on nonproliferation and political prisoners, pushing for more open markets, stressing that our improved relations cannot come at Taiwan's expense and making the case for democracy directly and compellingly to the Chinese people. It would be presumptuous to suggest that our engagement alone will cause democracy in China to blossom. China's future will be determined by the Chinese. But our engagement can contribute to an environment in which the Chinese people have more access to information, more contact with the democratic world and less resistance from their government to outside influences and ideas. It is too early to draw definitive conclusions about the success of our policy toward China or Burma. In both cases, we hope for progress; in neither do we expect miracles. Toward these countries and others where we hope for change, we must be patient and persistent. And we must design our policies not with a cookie cutter but with the special characteristics of each in mind. All this argues for flexibility. There has long been tension between the executive branch and Congress over mandated sanctions, prohibitions, restrictions, earmarks and other restraints on foreign policy. Having worked in both branches, I know that this tension is inevitable and, at times, constructive. When I meet with foreign officials, referring to pressure from Congress can help to spur action. What is not helpful is the growing tendency to view entire relationships through the prism of a single issue or to enact laws that deprive the executive of the leverage needed to bargain effectively. The true challenge of diplomacy does not reside in the beauty of our goals. Foreign policy is practical, not aesthetic. It requires persuading others to agree to new policies and actions based on new understandings. That may entail simple logic, economic incentives, technical assistance, new commitments, information-sharing, coercion, the threat of coercion, sanctions, the threat of sanctions or any combination of the above _ and it may require a different mix of those elements tomorrow than it does today. To do his job well, the president must be able to pick and choose. You would not ask a carpenter to build a house with only a hammer. We should not expect our chief executive to construct a successful foreign policy without a full box of tools. &UR; (Madeleine K. Albright is the 64th U.S. secretary of state.) &LR; &UR; NEXT: Part III: Five Major Tests of American Leadership &LR;  &QL; ------------------ &QC;
19981021115900000	WTO intervenes in Burma Law dispute. GENEVA (AP) _ A World Trade Organization panel is to rule in a dispute between the United States, Europe and Japan over U.S. legislation that bans trade with the military government of Burma. 
19981201104700000	Myanmar bars British officials. LONDON (AP) _ Myanmar has barred British ministers and officials from the country following British pressure on the military regime to hold talks with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi. 
19990126135000000	DOLLARS AND NONSENSE. &UR;  &LR; To do business overseas, especially in cudgel-wielding dictatorships, the savvy executive adopts a three-point strategy: 1) See No Evil, 2) Hear No Evil, 3) Speak No Evil. In the spirit of this philosophy, I present today in my capacity as chairman of the billion-dollar multinational Make a Buck at Any Cost Corp. my special report on American Business Sentiment Toward Burma. Let's begin with the government's own view of life in this Southeast Asian paradise of more than 47 million people. In the words of the ruling junta, Burma is one of the most pleasant places created by Mother Nature. I couldn't agree more. Of course, anti-business fanatics delight in squawking about the occasional tiffs between the people of Burma and their military rulers. Yes, Rangoon cracked down on protests in 1988, killing thousands to restore order. Yes, the government ignored results of an election in 1990 clearly indicating that 90 percent of the people rejected its rule and wanted democracy. And, yes, it placed the elected victor, Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, under house arrest. Yes, many of Suu Kyi's party members have been killed, jailed, or forced into exile. Yes, the rulers practice torture, turn a blind eye to slavery, and traffick in drugs. Is this any concern of ours? As long as imprisonments, torture, slavery, and political repression don't hinder business, let's not get in a huff about it. These spats will work themselves out. I will say just one thing to those who whine about human rights: We will battle all attempts to impose on us a social conscience. Are we in business to save the world or make a profit? Lately, I'm pleased to report, we've seen some progress in silencing the wild-eyed whiners. Right here in Massashusetts, we finally crushed a radical law late last year that bans state contracts with companies doing business with Burma. We applaud the clever logic of the National Foreign Trade Council, which took the battle into the courts on behalf of its 580 corporate members. The judge, in his wisdom, agreed with the council that the state law was unconstitutional. Of course! What right does Massachusetts, or any state, have to make its own foreign policy? But no sooner did we lop off the head of this human rights demon than another beast sprung up in its place. A month after the Massachusetts law was struck down, the Los Angeles city council voted unanimously to enact a similar ban on the municipal level. If only these were the few isolated attacks on us. But more than two dozen other states and cities are discussing or have already passed laws that target trade with not only Burma but other promising markets like Nigeria, Indonesia, and Cuba. Already some companies have retreated from Burma on moral grounds. It breaks my heart. If a company must withdraw, it is far better to do it proudly for manly businesslike reasons _ not from any moral squeamishness. Let us all hail Ericsson, the Swedish telecommunications giant. It ended operations in Burma last year because of threats of a worldwide consumer boycott. The company stated in unequivocal terms that its decision was not based on ethics _ it was, as it should be, purely a commercial move. &QL; (Steven Levingston is director of the Business and Economics Journalism Program at Boston University. He can be reached at leving(at)bu.edu)
19990223154219000	U.S., Europe Boycott Drug Meeting. YANGON, Myanmar (AP) -- The United States and European countries  were rebuked Tuesday for passing up an international heroin conference because it was in Myanmar, one of the world's biggest producers of the drug. Participants at the 4th International Heroin Conference said the  boycott by the world's biggest heroin consuming nations ran counter to the spirit of international cooperation against drug trafficking. ``As two of the largest markets for heroin in the world, the  United States and Britain bear a special responsibility to work with the rest of the international community in every way possible,'' Home Affairs Minister Col. Tin Hlaing said in his opening address. The four-day conference was organized by Interpol, the Lyon,  France-based agency that bolsters links among national police forces. Other countries boycotting the conference include France,  Denmark, the Netherlands and Norway. Representatives of 26 other countries, including Australia and Switzerland, were listed as attending. Washington and other critics say the military regime in Myanmar,  also known as Burma, has failed to seriously crack down on drugs and has such a poor human rights record that it does not deserve the legitimacy conferred by the conference. ``The United States believes that the Burmese regime could use  the conference to create the false impression of international approval, both by Interpol and by participating countries, for its counternarcotics and anti-crime performance,'' U.S. State Department spokesman James Foley said Tuesday in Washington. ``Burma's counternarcotics efforts, while improving, are far  from what is necessary. And Burma, of course, persists in its disregard for political and human rights.'' The New York-based Human Rights Watch likened holding the  meeting in Yangon to ``holding a convention on weapons of mass destruction in Baghdad, on women's rights in Kabul or on terrorism in Tripoli.'' Myanmar officials are especially sensitive to criticism on the  drug issue because they feel they have made great achievements in the fight against drugs -- especially measured by the number of seizures -- with almost no outside aid. Most foreign aid to the country was cut off a decade ago  following the bloody suppression of protests against military rule.
19990501000000000	26 Armed Group Members Surrender in Myanmar. YANGON, May 1 (Xinhua) -- A total of 26 members of various anti-government armed groups surrendered to the Myanmar government in March, official newspaper The New Light of Myanmar reported Saturday. These armed group members included those from the ethnic Lahu, All Burma Students' Democratic Front (ABSDF) and the remnants of the former drug trafficking Mong Tai Army (MTA). They laid down their arms in different military command areas including the Triangle Region and the Coastal Region. In armed opposition to the Myanmar government, the Lahu, the ABSDF and the MTA reportedly operate in the Myanmar-Thai border areas. According to official statistics, more than 500 members from various anti-government armed groups "exchanged arms for peace" with the government last year. Up to now, 17 anti-government ethnic armed groups as well as the MTA have made peace with the government.
19991005000000000	Myanmar Asks Thailand to Control Refugee Camps. YANGON, October 5 (Xinhua) -- Myanmar Tuesday demanded that the Thai government strictly control refugee camps on the Thai side of  the two countries' border. The demand was made by Colonel Thein Swe, head of the Department of Office of Strategic Studies of the Myanmar Defense Ministry at a press conference here Tuesday afternoon following the peaceful end of the siege of the Myanmar Embassy in Bangkok by Myanmar armed men last Saturday. He said there are 24 refugee camps along the Myanmar-Thai border where members and their families of different anti-Myanmar government armed groups such as the All Burma Students' Democratic Front (ABSDF), Kayin National Union (KNU) and Democratic Alliance of Burma (DAB) are living and conducting military and "terrorist" training there involving foreigners. Regarding the seizure of the Myanmar Embassy in Bangkok and the taking of hostages by Myanmar armed men, he stressed that the receiving country should take up the responsibility for the security of an embassy stationed there. He disclosed that five armed men -- three from the ABSDF, one from the KNU and the remaining one from the God's Children Army -- were involved in the incident last Friday. He added that the armed men demanded that the Myanmar government release all political prisoners, recognize the results of the 1990 general election and reshuffle the government. After a 25-hour tense standoff, the five Myanmar armed men Saturday ended their siege of the Myanmar Embassy and freed all the 38 hostages before they were flown to the Myanmar border in Ratchaburi in the company of Thai Deputy Foreign Minister Sukhumbhand Paribatra.
20000127191100000	U.S. MAY BE WILLING TO TAKE STUDENT REFUGEES FROM MYANMAR. WASHINGTON _ The Thai government has yet to ask the United States to accept 1,500 new Burmese student refugees, but a State Department official said Thursday that the United States ``would be willing to consider taking more refugees if there is a need.'' The United States has agreed to resettle 600 of these student refugees from Thailand this year, twice the number who were resettled here last year. The students fled Burma after the military coup in 1988 and have been refugees in Thailand for more than a decade. The official said the refugees had no connection to the Burmese guerrilla group that stormed a Thai hospital this week.
20000301000000000	U.S. Releases Annual Anti-drug Certification Report. The report says Cambodia, Haiti, Nigeria and Paraguay were not certified for cooperating but were granted a national interest waiver while Afghanistan and Burma were denied certification outright. The two countries were not certified because they "have been world headquarters for the heroin business" for several years, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told a briefing at the State Department. "In Afghanistan, the opium harvest grew substantially, and the Taliban's full complicity in the drug trade has extended to the point where both the harvesting and trafficking of opium is taxed, " Albright told reporters. The annual certification report has been attacked by the countries listed in the report as the interference into their domestic affairs. Latin American countries believe the U.S. administration should focus on efforts in reducing the consumption of drugs in the United States.
20000313181500000	U.S.: Workers Rights Lag in Myanmar. WASHINGTON (AP) -- Forced labor, including child labor, are widespread in Myanmar, and the government ignores workers' rights, the U.S. Labor Department said in a report Monday. The report, required by Congress, updates a 1998 review of labor conditions in Myanmar, also known as Burma, which reached similar conclusions. Based on findings of the U.S. Embassy in Rangoon, the report says forced labor is used to construct roads, dikes, canals and projects to support tourism, military operations and commercial ventures of the military. ''The latest report on labor practices in Burma reinforces our position that the international community must continue to push for a democratic transition in that country,'' Labor Secretary Alexis Herman said in a statement accompanying the report.
20000318174200000	Myanmar Democracy Leader Awarded. DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) -- Myanmar's pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi was awarded the Freedom of the City honor Saturday night in recognition of her activism in her Southeast Asian country. Suu Kyi won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 for her peaceful struggle for democracy against the military regime in Myanmar, also known as Burma. The military regime overturned her party's resounding victory in general elections the previous year, and refused to recognize the vote as legitimate. Hundreds of members of her National League for Democracy have since been jailed. Suu Kyi herself was under house arrest for six years before being released in 1995. Her movements and political activities remain heavily restricted. She did not attend the Dublin ceremony, but her son Kim Aris flew to Ireland to collect the award in her place. ''Aung San Suu Kyi was chosen for this award because of her long courageous stand in support of democracy in Burma,'' said Dublin's Lord Mayor Mary Freehill. ''We will leave the roll of honor unsigned like we did for (South African President) Nelson Mandela, until she is free to travel to Dublin herself to sign it.'' The members of Irish pop band U2 were also given the award. ''We regard this as a very big deal for us, and we are very humbled by it. It's humbling and it's fantastic,'' lead singer Bono said. Freehill, a longtime admirer of the band, said: ''In a lot of ways they put Dublin on the map when the city was not as popular as it is now.'' Other figures who have received the Freedom of the City honor include U.S. presidents John F. Kennedy and Bill Clinton, Pope John Paul II and Mother Teresa.
20000721201600000	THORN IN ASEAN'S SIDE. When Secretary of State Madeleine Albright arrives in Thailand for this week's ministerial meeting of ASEAN, the Association of South East Asian Nations, she will demonstrate American support for a regional grouping that can boast of many successes and one flagrant failure _ the military dictatorship ruining Burma. It is becoming harder and harder for ASEAN members to ignore the depredations of the Burmese junta. No country in ASEAN suffers more directly from the junta's crimes than host Thailand. For much of the past decade, the Thais have been democratizing a polity long dominated by corrupt military officers. At the recent AIDS conference in Durban, South Africa, the US ambassador to the United Nations, Richard Holbrooke, rightly praised the Thai government for its success in implementing policies to reduce the spread of HIV. But the uniformed thugs who rule Burma are undermining those hard-won triumphs. Whereas Bangkok has achieved exemplary progress in substituting legal cash crops for the poppies used to make heroin, Burma under the junta continues to be a principal source for the heroin that destroys lives from Bangkok to Boston. And where there is heroin addiction there is an inevitable increase in the rate of HIV infections and cases of AIDS. Recently, a new evil has come cascading into Thailand from Burma: millions of easily smuggled tablets of the stimulant methamphetamine. Although noninterference in the internal affairs of member states is a founding principle of ASEAN, the cross-border flow of narcotics, HIV, and refugees into Thailand demonstrates the folly of pretending that Burma's ASEAN neighbors are not affected by the junta's misrule. ``Lack of good governance is at the root of our country's troubles,'' the leader of Burma's democracy movement, Aung San Suu Kyi, wrote in a Washington Post op-ed article. ASEAN members ought to heed her temperate yet resolute counsel. They should pressure Burma's military junta to enter a political dialogue with Suu Kyi, Burma's ethnic nationalities, and the National League for Democracy, the party elected overwhelmingly in 1990 but immediately denied its right to govern by the military.
