10000000000000000	steps toward introduction of the Euro Describe steps taken and worldwide reaction prior to introduction of the Euro on January 1  1999  Include predictions and expectations reported in the press.
19960122211100000	Majority of EU Citizens in Favor of Single Currency. BRUSSELS, January 22 (Xinhua) -- Two recent Eurobarometer opinion polls showed that a majority of European Union(EU) citizens are in favor of the single currency. Two representative EU-wide opinion polls, conducted between mid October and shortly before Christmas 1995, showed that 54 percent of citizens interviewed are for the European currency, 37 percent are against, 9 percent have no opinion. Seven out of ten find the name of the Single currency "Euro" acceptable, almost one in four say the opposite, and one in twelve have no opinion. About the future European currency, 20 percent feel "well informed", 79 percent feel to be not well informed. In countries such as Sweden, France, Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal, more than 80 percent people feel to be "not very well informed" or "not at all informed".
19960129135600000	EC Denies Plans to Delay Launch of Euro. BRUSSELS, January 29 (Xinhua) -- The European Commission (EC) spokesman today formally denied newspaper reports that the EC is "secretly" drawing up plans to delay the launch of the single currency, the Euro. "The commission firmly sticks to its position that the Euro shall be introduced in conformity with the (Maastricht) Treaty criteria and timetable which have been confirmed by the December European Council of Madrid," the spokesman said. At the Madrid summit last December, leaders of EU member nations agreed unanimously that the European single currency will be formally launched on January 1, 1999.
19960221042700000	Juppe Stresses Importance of Single European Currency. PARIS, February 20 (Xinhua) -- Declaring that "Currency is politics," French Prime Minister Alain Juppe today reiterated France's determination to realize the single European currency. "The economic and monetary union is neither a technical issue, nor an economic demand," Juppe noted at a debate on the European economic and monetary union in the National Assembly. "It is firstly and mainly a political plan for us." He pointed out that such a political plan concerns the future of France and Germany, as well as the future role which the European countries will play in the world. Stressing that the introduction of a single currency will be a great contribution to the unity of an expanded European Union (EU), Juppe reiterated France's commitment to the timetable and criteria of the single currency system set in the Maastricht treaty, under which the single European currency, recently named Euro, will be realized by January 1, 1999. At present, qualms about a single currency still exist in France and many other EU member countries as some economists fear that a single currency means a country's loss of financial sovereignty. Many people worry that the tough budgetary criteria for the single currency will cause rising unemployment and worsening social welfare. In view of these confusions, Juppe gave a clear-cut answer by saying in the speech that only a single currency can guarantee currency stability, which means "lower interest rates, sustained economic growth and good prospects of employment." Juppe demanded French leaders make efforts to eliminate the confusions.
19960403023400000	Europe Begins Designing Single Currency. BONN, April 2 (Xinhua) -- Despite skepticism about the actual realization of a single European currency as scheduled on January 1, 1999, preparations for the design of the Euro note have already begun. The European Monetary Institute, responsible for the preparations, has set up a consultative group of artists, art historians and psychologists to come up with designs. The Frankfurt-based body said in its annual report released today that it has decided on two themes for the new currency: history of European civilization and abstract or concrete paintings. The Euro is expected to have seven notes with face values ranging from five to 500. The institute, which functions as a preparatory European Central Bank, began to invite tenders for making the new currency in February. The institute requires the design of the Euro to include five languages of the European Union together with the symbol of the EU -- 12 stars in a ring. It hasn't been decided whether the Euro should include country emblems. The Euro must also be counterfeit-proof and must include special designs to accommodate blind or poor-sighted people.
19960517000000000	UK Building Societies Prepare for Euro Mortgages. LONDON, May 16 (Xinhua) -- Britain's biggest mortgage lenders are planning to overhaul the traditional home loan ahead of a single European currency with the launch of euro mortgages. Lending giants in Britain have put detailed plans in place for financial life in the country after 1999, when they believe European currencies will join in a single currency, the euro, with the UK forced to accompany them within several years. Local press reports today said that the building societies have produced blueprints for euro savings accounts, passbooks and cash-dispensers despite the government's increasingly Eurosceptical tone. A spokesman of Halifax, the biggest mortgage lender in the UK, said, "Our view is that a single European currency will happen and that the UK will be brought in within two or three years. This will mean substantial changes for our products, the housing market and the economy as a whole. We have to look forward and be prepared." Bradford and Bingley's plans for a euro mortgage are already at an advanced stage, and will be launched ahead of the UK's participation in the single currency. Its chief executive Geoffrey Lister said, "We believe euro mortgages will be popular because they will offer lower interest rates than sterling mortgages. We could even reach the stage where Britain remains outside the currency alignment but employees ask to be paid in euro."
19970422000000000	Zambia to Benefit From Single Currency. LUSAKA, April 22 (Xinhua) -- Zambia will benefit from the establishment of the European Union Common Currency and the proposed dollar, the single currency of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), a Zambian bank official has said. Abraham Mwenda, director of financial markets of Bank of Zambia, said that if the EU comes up with one single Euro-currency this will make it easy for Zambia to deal with one currency and help reduce costs, according to Financial Mail. The local newspaper today also quoted senior economist with the bank Jacob Lushinga as saying that the idea of a single currency is to help facilitate trade and enhance exchange of goods that could be beneficial to Zambia. Lushinga said the importance of the Euro-currency will depend on Zambia's major trading partners. The EU is Zambia's second main market for non-traditional exports after COMESA.
19970425000000000	EU Welcomes New Currency Code for Euro. BRUSSELS, April 25 (Xinhua) -- The European Commission, the European Union (EU)'s executive body, today welcomed the decision by the Maintenance Agency for ISO 4217, the body responsible for the issuance of currency codes, to attribute the code "EUR" to the Euro. This new code has been issued to allow progress with the technical preparations for the European single currency, scheduled to be launched on January 1, 1999, said a press release issued here today. The code is intended for use in any application of trade, commerce and banking which is based on uniform, internationally agreed representations of currencies. It will allow currency users to identify the new currency easily. The early attribution of the currency code will help economic agents, in particular financial institutions, in their preparatory work for the introduction of the single currency.
19970827000000000	UK Economists Expect Single Currency to Go Ahead. LONDON, August 26 (Xinhua) -- The European single currency euro will go ahead on schedule on January 1, 1999 with a broad membership, according to a survey of some prominent British economists. The survey, carried out by the pro-European pressure group named European Movement, revealed that a majority of those polled agree that the single currency to be broadly successful, but none of them expects Britain to join the European Monetary Union (EMU) in the first wave. Those who believe that the EMU will be a success cite low interest rates, low unemployment and low inflation as benefits of the planned single currency. Fears of a single currency failure focus on the reduction of monetary flexibility and the risk that the European Central Bank will set interest rates too high. Director of the European Movement Stephen Woodard said, "The single currency debate in this country has suffered from too much ill-informed speculation and too little fact." sooddard called on Britain to make various preparations and rational debates on the single currency as "the single currency is going to happen." "If Britain is to make up its mind on this crucial issue, it must be discussed in an informed way, free from prejudice and hype," he added.
19971010000000000	Most German Companies Not Ready for Euro. BONN, October 10 (Xinhua) -- German Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt said today that most German companies are not prepared for the shift to the single European currency, the Euro, which is due to be launched on January 1, 1999. Only 20 percent of German companies have taken concrete steps to get prepared for the Euro, Rexrodt said, adding that the country's state institutions were also not well prepared. As a result, they possibly wouldn't be able to do transactions in Euro from the day it takes effect. The European Union member states are required to completely replace their own national currencies with the Euro from January 1, 2002.
19980421000000000	Investors to Benefit From Euro, Bundesbank Says. BONN, April 20 (Xinhua) -- Private investors are set to benefit from the 1999 introduction of the single European currency, the euro, thanks to expanded investment opportunities, reduced currency risks, and rising competitions, the German central bank Bundesbank said Monday. In its latest monthly report issued Monday, the Bundesbank said that as national currency boundaries vanish and most European stocks and bonds are denominated in euros, investors will be able to make use of a variety of cross-border investment opportunities in the euro area which will become the second largest capital market in the world. Moreover, investors are also set to benefit from reduced transaction costs and improved market transparency resulting from heated competitions among financial institutions after the advent of the euro, the Bundesbank said.
19980502000000000	Euro Trading to Begin Next Monday. BRUSSELS, May 2 (Xinhua) -- Trading in Europe's new single currency will begin on Monday as a United States bank and a Dutch one have offered to quote prices in the euro. Citibank, the world's largest foreign exchange operator, and ABN-AMRO said that they had planned to quote prices in the euro for their clients starting next Monday. The founder countries of the euro, as the new single currency is known, are scheduled to adopt new currency while banks and exchanges will start using euro in all scriptural transactions such as writing checks, using credit and charge cards, and buying bonds and stocks. Euro bank notes and coins will become legal tender on January 1, 2002 while national currencies of the euro founder countries stop circulating completely by July 1, 2002. The two banks' announcement to offer an unofficial market in the new single currency before it effectively comes into existence shows a strong sign that the financial markets have fully accepted the launch of the euro. The European summit at heads of state and government level is scheduled to confirm which European Union member states are eligible to become the original members of the euro zone. Both the European Parliament and the European council of economy and finance ministers have approved the recommendation of the European Commission that Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal and Finland be the founding countries. Britain, which is serving the rotating presidency of the 15-nation European Union, and Denmark have opted out of the euro club whereas Greece and Sweden have been judged by the commission not economically ready to join in. Once confirmed by Saturday's summit of European heads of state and government, the 11 euro countries will have to prepare to put 70 billion euro into circulation while pool another 50 billion euro in the reserve to make the new money impregnable against speculators. The total cost of introducing the euro is estimated to be at 1 to 1.5 percent of the gross domestic product of the 11 euro countries.
19980505000000000	China Welcomes the Initiation of Euro, Spokesman Says. BEIJING, May 5 (Xinhua) -- Foreign Ministry Spokesman Zhu Bangzao said here today that the Chinese government welcomes the initiation of the Euro currency early next year. In response to a question concerning the issue at today's news conference, Zhu said the introduction of the Euro is expected to stimulate European integration, help establish a more balanced world financial system and exert influence on the world's economy and politics. The European summit confirmed Sunday that Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal and Finland will be founding members of the Euro organization. The summit has also confirmed candidates for the presidency of the European Central Bank.
19980614142700000	European central bank chief says euro will rival U.S. dollar.
19980912000000000	Euro Banknotes to Be Printed Early 1999. BONN, September 11 (Xinhua) -- The mass printing of the banknotes of the single European currency, the euro, would be started at the beginning of 1999, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced in Frankfurt Friday. The decision was made by the ECB's governing council during a meeting in Frankfurt on Friday. Meanwhile the bank also decided to start this Autumn a test printing of the euro banknotes, which have a total of seven face values. European Union's single-currency plan will take effect in 11 of its member states on January 1, 1999, when the euro will become a currency in the financial sense, but will first be used only in cashless tradings. The actual banknotes and coins will be introduced over a six-month period starting January 1, 2002, after which the participants' present national currencies will cease to be legal tender. Germany already started to mint euro coins early August.
19980921000000000	Single Currency Data on Internet. BRUSSELS, September 21 (Xinhua) -- Those who take interest in the single currency due out soon were offered from Monday onward Internet access to free information on the euro. Eurostat, the statistical bureau of the European community, is responsible for this euro-related information program and the euro data will be updated on a daily basis. Yves-Thibault de Silguy, European economy and finance commissioner, told the press that the publication of key euro indicators on the Internet is an important initiative and the data provided will prove useful for the economic management in the euro zone as well as in the European Union. The commissioner said, "The euro indicators will provide member states, the European Central Bank, national central banks, financial markets, enterprises, the media and the public with the latest Economic and Monetary Union statistics essential for decision-making." He added that the statistics would be updated at noon every day, a significant improvement on Eurostat's service. The indicators, accessible at http:\\europa.eu.int/eurostat.html, will include national accounts statistics, monetary and financial indicators, external trade, balance of payments, prices, industry, labor market, public finance and short-term qualitative surveys. The single currency and employment were among the top three topics for which more information is desired by the respondents to a recent EU questionnaire. The other top topic is the rights for being a European citizen.
19981022000000000	Bulgaria Moves to Link its Currency with the Euro. SOFIA, October 22 (Xinhua) -- Bulgaria has been working to link its currency, the lev, with the proposed European single currency, the euro, in a bid to speed up the country's financial integration into the European economy. In order to seize the opportunity to share in the start up of the euro, which is scheduled for January 1, 1999, the Bulgarian government adopted a system of monetary commission on July 1, 1997, and established a connection between the Bulgarian lev and the German mark. Under the new system, one German mark is equivalent to 1,000 Bulgarian lev. The mark has also been used for the settlement of foreign exchange reserves. Bulgarian Finance Minister Muravei Radev has pledged that the lev will experience its connection with the euro automatically as the European single currency comes into use less than three months later, and that the entire process of transition will be accomplished by July 1, 1999. With regard to easing the accounting, the Bulgarian government plans to print next year a new national currency, with a face value of one lev equivalent to one Mark. Meanwhile, the euro will be used to replace the German mark as the accounting unit for Bulgaria's foreign exchange reserve.
19981022130000000	European bank boss says euro won't compete with dollar. BERLIN (AP) _ European Central Bank President Wim Duisenberg said Thursday that Europe's new single currency, the euro, won't compete with the U.S. dollar as the currency of choice for foreign reserves. 
19981110000000000	Thailand Considers Using Euro in Foreign Reserves. BANGKOK, November 10 (Xinhua) -- Thailand is considering using the European single currency, the euro, in the country's foreign reserves, the Nation reported Tuesday. The Council of Economic Ministers of Thailand has ordered the Finance Ministry and the Bank of Thailand to study the possibility as the single European currency is set to go into circulation on January 1 next year. A special task force will study the impact of the euro on the country's official reserves in a bid to help stem volatility of the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen. "If the euro proves stable, Thailand will use it as part of our international reserves," a government official was quoted as saying. In addition, the council also assigned the Commerce Ministry to set up a group to work with state agencies, including the Foreign Ministry, to examine the impact of the euro on Thailand's international trade. Moreover, a study on the impact on the country's investment will be undertaken by the Board of Investment while the National Economic and Social Development Board will join hands with the central bank to dig into the impact of the European single currency on Thailand's macro-economy. A combined European Union market is expected to be helpful for Thai exporters to gain more excess into the market. The single currency will also benefit Thailand's import from the EU as it will reduce the operating costs of European traders. However, the arrival of the euro is likely to reduce Thailand's trading volume with other countries significantly, the official said.
19981113000000000	Euro May Pose Strategical and Tactical Problems. BUCHAREST, November 12 (Xinhua) -- The introduction of the single European currency, the Euro, would pose strategical as well as tactical problems to the economy of Romania, an associate EU country seeking admission, the Rompres news agency Thursday quoted Romania's Central Bank Governor Mugur Isarescu as saying. Romanian bankers and economists could not be indifferent to the future of Euro in the international payment system and as a reserve currency, the evolution of the Euro-Dollar exchange rate, the relations which will be established between the national currency Leu and Euro, or Euro's effect on Romanian commercial and payments balance, Isarescu said at a Wednesday colloquium on Euro by the Romanian Society of Economics. The answers to these matters represent the precondition for identifying the monetary and currency policies which might ensure, in the shortest delay, the criteria for a convergence between the Romanian economic and monetary system, on the one hand, and the Economic and monetary Union, on the other hand, the Governor added.
19981120000000000	France Strikes 1 Billion Euro Coins. PARIS, November 19 (Xinhua) -- France has already struck one billion coins of the European single currency euro, which will be launched by January 1999, reported Agence France-Presse (AFP) on Thursday. Besides France, only Finland, Belgium and Spain have begun their production of the euros, but not as much as France, said AFP quoting official sources. Germany is in "an advanced stage" of experimenting striking the euro, while other European nations which will join euro are due to begin producing the coin next year. A total of 70 billion coins of the single currency should be issued to replace the national currencies by January 2002.
19981121000000000	Indian Banks Allowed to Deal in Euro. NEW DELHI, November 21 (Xinhua) -- The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has permitted Indian banks to transact in the Euro, the new currency unit of the European Monetary Union (EMU), RBI sources said here Saturday. The Euro will be launched on January 1, 1999. In a circular issued to banks on Friday, RBI permitted banks to trade and invoice in the Euro, freely convert legacy EMU currencies into the Euro, and accept Euro-denominated bank deposits and remittances. It also asked banks to ensure their information system's Euro-compliance. The RBI has set up a working group to study the implications of the Euro launch. Requests for conversion of existing deposits to Euro may be freely allowed and these rules apply to export earners' foreign currency and residents' foreign currency accounts, it said.
19981215000000000	Romania Braces Itself for Euro Launch. BUCHAREST, December 14 (Xinhua) -- The Administration Board of Romania's central bank (BNR)has had made a number of decisions in connection with the introduction of the single currency in the European Union's member states beginning January 1, 1999, BNR director Adrian Vasilescu said on Monday. Vasilescu said the central bank had decided that the rates of exchange posted by hard currency operators should also include the single currency unit. The single currency will be also used in the reports issued by the General Directorate of Monetary and Hard Currency Policy, he added. Vasilescu said the BNR would use the Euro money unit in printed matters destined for the mass-media. The daily exchange rates released by the central bank would include the single currency, too, he said. The new currency will affect only the Romanian businessmen in the Euro zone and those whose trade is dominated by the single currency unit, Vasilescu said. According to statistics, the EU is the most important commercial partner of Romania, with the bilateral trade making up 60 percent of Romanian total foreign trade.
19981216000000000	Romanian Banking System Ready to Operate Services in Euro. BUCHAREST, December 15 (Xinhua) -- The Romanian banking system is ready to perform services in the European single currency, the euro, the Rompres news agency reported on Tuesday citing sources from Romania's Central Bank. "Romania's Central Bank (BNR) and the country's commercial banks fear little about the introduction of the euro and will easily adapt to it," BNR Foreign Currency Director George Mucibabici told a recent colloquium on euro in Bucharest. BNR and Romanian commercial banks that want to perform euro services will have to open accounts in euro by January 4, 1999, the first scheduled day of euro use, and inform their foreign partners. BNR indicative exchange rates will be modified to include euro instead of the current European single currency, the ECU.
19981231092600000	With The Euro. BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Eleven of the European Union's 15 members soldered their moneys into a single currency Thursday, but that act of monetary union also had consequences for such diverse places as Monaco, the Vatican and the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon off the coast of Canada.  With Euro. SOFIA, Bulgaria (AP) - The Bulgarian National Bank announced Thursday its national currency, the lev, will be fixed at 1,955.83 to the euro. 
