10000000000000000	Health related problems related to working with computers What health related problems have been identified with working with computers  How prevalent are these problems  What new health and safety measures  computer equipment  and computer furniture are being introduced into the work place to alleviate these problem.
19890113000000000	THE NATION. A law requiring rest breaks and special training for many workers using video display terminals went into effect in a Long Island, N.Y., county despite a legal challenge. Suffolk County health officials, who will enforce the law, estimated that it applies to 8,500 VDT users in 150 to 200 businesses. The measure is believed to be the first VDT-regulating law enacted by a local government. A state Supreme Court judge is expected to rule within the next two weeks on a challenge to the measure brought by four businesses.
19890119000000000	JOB STRESS IS FACTOR IN HEART DISEASE, EXPERTS SAY. "This job's going to be the death of me yet." Maybe you've heard those words coming from your own lips during some crisis at your place of employment. The fact is, most of us who work for a living probably voice similar sentiments at times. Often we say it jokingly, but for many American wage-earners, this oft-repeated statement may be dangerously close to the truth. While work-related stress is as old as civilization itself, the highly structured, highly technical, increasingly complex and often depersonalized workplace of the 1980s may be an especially stressful environment for many who deal with it every day. Now a growing body of medical evidence suggests that some jobs exact a potentially deadly toll.  Contributing Factor The American Heart Assn. classifies stress as a contributing factor in the development of heart disease. While its impact isn't as significant as that of smoking, high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol, stress shouldn't be ignored. There is still much to be learned about job stress and its effects on the cardiovascular system, but a number of recent independent studies have turned up some surprising findings. * In their day-to-day jobs, police officers and firefighters face one crisis after another, as well as the ever-present threat of physical injury and even violent death. Consequently, it has often been assumed that police officers and firefighters are at greater risk of heart attack than almost any other type of worker. And yet two studies at the Veterans Administration Outpatient Clinic in Boston show that officers and firefighters actually have no greater incidence of coronary heart disease than the general public. * Bus drivers, on the other hand, are not so fortunate. Dr. S. Leonard Syme, an epidemiologist at UC Berkeley, along with David Ragland Ph.D., and Marilyn Winkelby Ph.D., studied 1,500 bus drivers in San Francisco. The researchers found that, compared to other groups of the same age, race and socioeconomic level, the bus drivers were 50% more likely to suffer from high blood pressure. They also discovered that newly hired bus drivers with normal blood pressure were likely to develop high blood pressure within 3 to 5 years. Similar studies of transit drivers in widely separated areas of the world confirmed the group's findings. * People with highly monitored indoor jobs may also face an increased incidence of heart problems. A study conducted at the University of North Carolina by investigator Suzanne G. Haynes (Haynes is now at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.), revealed that women telephone company workers using video display terminals reported a surprisingly high incidence of anginal chest pain, a symptom of coronary heart disease. Among VDT users, 15.2% reported angina, compared with 7.7% of the non-users.  Strict Rules Cited The highest rates of chest pain were found in women who, like the bus drivers, had jobs with high demand and low control. Their jobs involved dealing with complaint calls from telephone company customers and answering directory assistance calls. And the workers had strict rules about how to handle the calls. They were constantly monitored and were penalized if they didn't stick to the rules. * The hearts of women workers in general, however, seem less affected by job-related stress than those of their male co-workers. In the Framingham, Mass., Heart Study, Haynes found that women in the labor force have no greater incidence of heart disease than housewives, and that employed women still enjoy a significant survival advantage over employed men. In fact, women employed for the longest period of time seemed to have the lowest incidence of heart disease. * Two other unrelated studies yielded apparently conflicting results. Harvard Medical School researchers found that white-collar workers may be 30% less likely to die of a heart attack than blue-collar workers. But another report showed that administrative employees with management responsibilities are more likely to be disabled by heart disease than either blue-collar workers or such other professionals as lawyers, educators and entertainers. This research was done at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in Cincinnati. Stress as a risk factor is such a complicated issue that no one study can be expected to give us the answer. However, various studies are closing in on the problem of stress. Most authorities would agree that you are better off if you feel you have a "say" in how your job is carried out. The level of job stress is frequently higher for people in positions with high psychological strain and low control, says Dr. Peter Schnall of Cornell University Medical College. Schnall heads a team of researchers who screened 2,556 male workers in New York City, then picked 191 of the most "job-strained" -- all of whom had elevated blood pressures -- to study closely.  List of Occupations Assembly-line workers, service workers, short-order cooks, waiters, clerical workers and teachers are among the occupational groups in which job strain is frequently found, Schnall says. All fit the high demand-low control pattern that produces stress and high blood pressure. On the other hand, people may be able to perform highly demanding -- even dangerous -- jobs with no apparent ill effects. This may explain why officers, firefighters and such high-tension specialists as air traffic controllers have no higher incidence of cardiovascular problems than the average American. "Professional jobs that are high in demand but also high in control don't produce the same kind of strain that many workers in high demand-low control jobs encounter," Schnall says. "Our research suggests that (certain) jobs are stressful regardless of the personality of the individual who is in it." "As a worker, you need to have a way of participating in what you're doing and have some discretion in dealing with the demands of your job," says Syme, whose study of San Francisco bus drivers revealed that many drivers feel trapped and hopeless. The drivers are forced to work under the demands of a time schedule that is often impossible to meet, Syme explains. Yet many drivers attempt to stay on schedule by forfeiting lunch hours and rest breaks, knowing that supervisors will take note when drivers are late. Since most drivers have few other work skills and earn high salaries that would be hard to duplicate somewhere else, they try to protect their jobs at all costs.  'Stopping the Pain' "Expecting a worker to adjust to circumstances like these is asking a lot," Syme says. "Sometimes it's the system itself and the working environment it produces that needs to be changed. The Japanese system of worker input in the auto industry has proved its beneficial impact to the point that American companies are now beginning to adopt it. It's a case of stopping the pain at the source rather than just trying to help people adjust to the pain." Responsibility over fellow workers also appears to heighten the risk of job-related stress and resulting heart problems, according to Robert Brackbill, Ph.D., an epidemiologist at the NIOSH. Brackbill and other scientists studied 446,000 persons approved for Social Security disability payments from 1969 to 1976 and concluded that managers as an occupational group have the highest odds of being disabled by heart disease. "We found the common element to be some type of supervisory function and management responsibilities, whether the person is a factory foreman, a store manager or an office administrator," Brackbill notes. It may be no coincidence that this managerial class of employees includes many of the aggressive, hard-driving executives who typify so-called "Type A" behavior and who may be prime candidates for developing heart disease. In a 2-year experiment with monkeys, Jay Kaplan, Ph.D., and his colleagues at Bowman Gray School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, N.C., found that social turmoil produced a higher level of atherosclerosis, one type of "hardening of the arteries," in aggressive, dominant animals than in more submissive ones.  Groups of Five Monkeys normally live in groups of five, Kaplan says, with one monkey dominant in each group. The others form a "pecking order" based on strength and aggressiveness, with the weakest, least assertive monkey at the bottom. In the experiment, the groups were realigned monthly, and dominant monkeys were repeatedly thrown into conflict with other dominant monkeys. "Human behavior is certainly much more complex than that of monkeys," Kaplan says, "but I think there's an analogy between an aggressive monkey in a new social group and the type of aggressive mid-level executive who jumps from job to job in quest of more money, recognition and other rewards. Our conclusion is that there's potential for personality to interact with job situations in a way that could be dangerous. Job stress is only half the equation. The other half is the person's reaction to it." Few of us can afford to give up the jobs we have, of course -- no matter how stressful they may be. But we can adopt certain defenses against job strain and the health problems it can cause. Some of these include: * Valuing and enjoying one's work, and giving job satisfaction equal priority with such factors as salary and position. * Refusing to be ruled by unrealistic deadlines and demands. * Taking adequate time off for rest and relaxation. * Avoiding confrontational, competitive situations whenever possible. * Staying on amiable terms with fellow employees, regardless of whether they are superiors or subordinates. "We need to raise the consciousness of everybody, across the board, about the problem of job stress," Syme concludes. "One way to start reducing stress is to try to help the people who work with you. Another is to work with supervisors to encourage worker input and advice about work conditions."
19890312000000000	COMPUTERITIS; HIGH TECHNOLOGY HAS MADE COUNTLESS JOBS EASIER. IT HAS ALSO AFFLICTED COUNTLESS WORKERS WITH THE INDUSTRIAL INJURY OF THE INFORMATION AGE.. IT HAPPENED TO Ola Bullock, a 44-year-old data reviewer at the Watts branch of the Social Security Administration. It happened to Silvia Perez, a 39-year-old service representative for Pacific Bell in Orange. It happened to a contracts administrator for a Los Angeles-area entertainment company, an airline reservations clerk from the San Fernando Valley, a discount stockbroker in San Francisco. It has crept up on secretaries, screenwriters, accounting clerks, broadcast graphics engineers. And it sneaked up on me -- a 32-year-old reporter for the Los Angeles Times. At first, each of us occasionally felt minor aches so subtle that we barely realized we hurt. Over time, we developed an invisible affliction that made the simplest hand movement a major effort filled with pain. It hurt to wash, to eat, to open doors, to pick up a baby. It meant losing independence, and it threatened our jobs. Bullock couldn't fill out her income tax forms. I could barely brush my teeth. "When I tried to apply pressure," Perez says, "it was like putting your hand on a nail. I mean it hurt." Researchers call it the industrial injury of the Information Age. Doctors call it cumulative trauma disorder or overuse syndrome or repetitive strain injury. I call it computeritis. IN THE PAST decade, computers have become as common in the office as telephones. They do it all: researching, filing, calculating, editing, mailing. Along with efficiency and speed and ease, though, the high-tech revolution also has generated complaints of crippling side effects. Questions have been raised about problems such as blurred vision and an increased risk of miscarriage or birth defects. Most clearly linked to computer work, however, is damage to tendons, muscles and nerves, apparently caused by punching keys as often as 18,000 times an hour, for hours at a time. Cumulative trauma disorder is not a new phenomenon, but until recently it appeared to be confined to manufacturing work. It has shown up in meatpacking plants, textile mills, auto assembly lines -- anyplace where hand and arm motions are repeated continuously. Over the past 10 years, as automation has reduced jobs to simpler tasks and the race to increase productivity has cut into rest periods, these problems are affecting more and more workers. Last October, the U.S. Labor Department levied a fine of $4.3 million, the largest in its 17-year history, against John Morrell & Co. for "willfully ignoring" cumulative trauma disorder that struck more than 40% of the 2,000 employees in a South Dakota meatpacking plant. In December, a $1.4 million fine was proposed for cumulative trauma disorder at a Pepperidge Farms Inc. cookie factory in Pennsylvania. Both companies are currently negotiating settlements with the Labor Department. Some employers question the connection of cumulative trauma disorder to computer work. In workers' compensation cases, they have argued that the problems may result from aging or hobbies, such as knitting, sewing or playing musical instruments. And two social scientists from Carnegie Mellon University argued in the December issue of American Psychologist that the injuries are being used by some Australian clerical workers as an excuse to get disability pensions and escape their boring jobs. But the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, a research arm of the Department of Health and Human Services that advises the Labor Department, is convinced that repetitive strain injuries have a cause-and-effect relationship to computer work. "It's not unique to computers," says Vern Anderson, a NIOSH ergonomist (an expert in adapting workplaces for workers), "but we are seeing more cases of it because the proportion of the work force using computers is increasing." Currently, 20 million people in the United States use computers daily to make a living, according to the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Assn. By the year 2000, the association predicts, 75% of all jobs will involve computers. Laurie Fraser studied cumulative trauma disorder as an ergonomist for the California health department. "It's valid to assume," she says, "that millions of Americans have computer-related (cumulative trauma) disorder now." MY FIRST BOUT with computeritis began in late 1986. Very early one December morning, I opened my eyes to the predawn gray and wondered why I was awake. I moved slightly. Then all I saw was a haze brought on by sudden agony. The next day, after I took a painkiller prescribed by a doctor, my neck was much better. While typing a story later, however, my hands went numb. My fingers tingled as if they were being pricked by pins and needles. The doctor thought that I had a pinched nerve in my neck, caused by cradling a phone on my shoulder while I took notes on my computer. The pinched nerve ran down my arm, said a chiropractor I started seeing. The hands would heal, he predicted, as pressure eased off the nerve. I exchanged my telephone receiver for a telephone headset and waited for improvement. Instead, everything got worse. My forearms felt heavy and sore. Nothing eased the pain. My chiropractor, Bradley Frederick, theorized that the pinched nerve was not my only problem. He had seen something like this a few times before, in people who worked with computers. I had heard vague tales about others at The Times stricken by something called "computer disease." When I casually mentioned to a Times computer-systems expert that I seemed to have a touch of it, he stared at me, hard. You better take it seriously, he snapped. It can ruin you. He gave me the name of a reporter who had been forced to take a non-reporting job for nine months because of the pain. Nine months! I called. The man was reporting again, but he still hurt. Stop typing now, he ordered me. Otherwise, it gets much worse. As we talked, I sat facing the glowing green letters of a half-finished story on my computer screen. I hung up and kept staring, wondering if I had drifted into a cheap horror flick: The Revenge of the Office Machines. I knew there was always a chance of getting hurt on the job, but the risks of journalism had seemed kind of glamorous. I had wandered into the middle of a heroin bust in a Baltimore ghetto, driven through a Florida hurricane and investigated a thug who relayed threats to me. The newsroom, removed from the rush and rumble of the real world, was not supposed to pose any danger. I refocused on the screen. I wanted to change a sentence, but I didn't dare touch the keys. WHEN you work on a computer, shoulder muscles are tight, constrained to support the arms. Eye muscles remain rigidly focused on the screen, usually 15 to 20 inches away. Each time you punch a key, a muscle running from the elbow through the forearm contracts. The muscle is attached to tendons that slide back in lubricated sheaths through the wrist to lift the fingers. The muscle relaxes, the tendons slide forward, the finger pushes down. When Ola Bullock enters Social Security information into her computer, she doesn't have to pause as she would with a typewriter. She doesn't have to roll out a finished form or insert a new one. Contract, slide, relax. Silvia Perez types phone orders into a computer almost continuously. Contract, slide, relax. I can move paragraphs at will, so I rewrite endlessly. To chat with colleagues, I tap out a message and dispatch it electronically. Contract, slide, relax. Contract, slide, relax. Cumulative trauma disorder encompasses problems ranging from swollen tendons and muscle spasms to severe nerve damage, or any combination thereof. It usually starts when excessive friction scars tissues that then stick to tendons, muscle or bone. The tendon sheaths tighten, changing the lubrication inside from the normal egg-white consistency to a gluey texture. Body parts go from slipping easily to a constant tug-and-pull. In response, the tendon sheaths may become inflamed, a condition known as tenosynovitis. Or the tendons themselves may swell, an injury called tendinitis. My doctor said I had both. Swollen tendons can push into the wrist, compressing the median nerve, which runs through a passage in the wrist -- the carpal tunnel -- to the fingers. The disorder can also surface along the ulnar nerve running from the elbow to the little finger. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a potentially crippling injury that may require surgery to widen the tunnel and relieve pressure on the nerve. That's what happened to Perez. Her hands deteriorated for a year, from cramps to numbness to shoulder pain. Finally, she lost her grip. Perez had an operation performed on her right wrist. Within six weeks, before she could return to work, her doctor ordered similar surgery on the left wrist. "You can also get muscle-pain-spasm syndrome," says Linda H. Morse, chief of occupational medicine at Valley Health Center in the Silicon Valley. "That term covers about 20 different situations. . . . Usually we see it in the muscles of the neck and upper back and sometimes in the shoulder." Bullock is a case in point. Her pain appeared in her neck, shoulder and shoulder blades. Such spasms can become permanent if allowed to progress. Computeritis researchers are not certain why some people have some symptoms and others have different ones. Nor are they sure why some people manage to hold up under the strain with no problems at all. But they suspect that the most likely victims are those whose efficiency of movement is hampered by conditions ranging from my pinched nerve to someone else's lower back trouble or old shoulder injury. Prolonged computer work, Morse says, is so harsh that there is little tolerance for imperfections. The pain, she says, tends to show up where the imperfections are. The most common factor is bad posture -- not only of the neck and spine, but also of the arms and hands. Bad posture can create the last bit of extra pressure, that marginal defect, that leaves computer users vulnerable. Design of furniture and of the computer itself can affect posture. If keyboards are too high or too thick, or if chairs are too low, operators may be forced to work with hands bent upward. Try it and feel the tendons behind the wrist bunching together; it makes that slide movement tough. Screens can also be too high, or too low, or too far away, prompting operators to crane their necks for hours. The keys can be so stiff that it takes a mighty effort to push them. Computer users may not even realize when their bodies are compromised. "It's amazing how much difference an inch or two can make," says Mark S. Sanders, an ergonomics consultant on the faculty at California State University, Northridge. THE FIRST STEP in my treatment was to change the way I worked. The Times' safety director suggested a new chair and a wrist rest -- a black leather pad that sits in front of the keyboard to assure that wrists stay in a level position. He raised my screen so that I could keep my neck straight instead of stretching to peer down at it. With the acquiescence of my editor, I cut back on how often I wrote. At the International Sports Medicine Institute in West Los Angeles, Bradley Frederick worked on the pinched nerve in my neck. In the institute's clinic, I received ultrasound and electronic stimulation to ease the inflammation in my forearms and wrists. By June, 1987, I was feeling much better and turning out more copy. Then, on Oct. 1 that year, the Whittier earthquake struck. I had one hour to report and write a story for a special edition of the paper. My fingers skittered across my computer keyboard; I was pumped up, concentrating, composing as fast as I could. I noticed a tiny circle of pain lodged under my right shoulder. The deadline passed; another loomed. As I pounded at the keys, the pinpoint of pain started glowing hot. That night, the fire in my shoulder wouldn't let me sleep. Within two weeks, the pain spread to my neck. I could barely lift my head. Frequent lightning-bolt sensations struck my elbows. The pads on my palms swelled to twice their normal size. My wrists felt as if barbed wire were strung inside. This was worse than the first time. Driving, writing longhand and typing shot sparks up and down my arm. Once again, I reduced my workload. I started seeing Frederick three times a week. Reluctantly, he recommended that I wear a wrist splint. Although it would offer support, prolonged use might also lead to muscle atrophy. Even these efforts failed to halt my slide. A month later, I consulted an orthopedic surgeon, Robert W. Chandler, at the Kerlan-Jobe Orthopaedic Clinic in Inglewood. I had heard about him from other Times computeritis victims. He recommended physical therapy. "You were fairly debilitated," recalls Betsy Fleisher Terry, the physical therapist I started visiting at Schlink, Nadel & Associates in West Los Angeles. Strength, she told me, is rated by therapists on a 0-to-5 scale. My wrist muscles were "about a 3, in some cases a 3-plus," she says. "You can be fairly functional at a 3-plus, but that tends to lead to more problems because you're so weak. It sort of becomes a cycle. You overused it, so it hurts, so you don't use it, so it becomes weak, so it's easier to overuse it again and then it hurts. "You see this 3-plus in older people," she says, "people in their 80s." I was 31. Like Frederick, Terry had treated others with computeritis. All had resumed their normal lives within several months, she said. Because I was on my second episode, she calculated that my recovery would take at least a year. Wisely, she kept her estimate to herself. I would have been stunned. I was already reeling from the realization that an "episode" could happen again and again. I was by turns stoic and hysterical, determined to fight my way back to health and frightened that my life as a reporter -- my identity since high school -- must be over. I railed at the fates, and at my husband and my friends. In the Times cafeteria one day, I chose beef stew for lunch because I didn't think it would require any cutting -- cutting hurt too much. The potatoes, however, were too big. My companion noticed that I wasn't eating them, and sighed. She reached over to slice the chunks into tiny pieces. She was visibly pregnant at the time; it made a nice domestic scene. At home, my husband, Steve, found me standing helplessly in front of the dryer. It hurt so much to fold the laundry that I had to stop. When Steve and I took a vacation, I made up my mind to avoid talking about my condition. We both needed to forget about it. We stayed with friends in New York City. Before 7 the first morning, I crept out of the guest bed -- a mattress in the living room -- and reached for a jump rope I had packed and a towel I had laid out the night before. I crept through the darkened apartment to the special place I had scouted out earlier. I had a ritual to perform in solitude. What I hadn't planned on was our hosts' waking up so early and going out for breakfast. The two of them came down the hall, bundled in coats and scarves, and found their exit blocked. There I was, prone on the floor, my head in a noose that I had fashioned from the towel. The rope secured the noose to the knob of the front door. I had hoped to keep my need for daily traction a secret. They thought I was trying to hang myself. EVERY MONDAY, Wednesday and Friday, Ola Bullock stops typing at noon and travels to Inglewood for physical therapy. Her supervisor is sympathetic but occasionally asks how much longer she's going to need the treatments. "There've been budget cutbacks. There's no one else to do my work," Bullock says. Before Silvia Perez had her surgery, "I was doing maybe 30% of my job," she says. "I tried taking calls and writing out orders, but then someone else had to type it in," she says. She worried about the added pressure on her co-workers: "What I couldn't do, they were doing." The more people affected at any given office, the more devastating the loss in productivity. Over the past four years, more than 200 of The Times' 1,100 editorial employees have sought medical help for computeritis. Similar symptoms have cropped up at newspapers across the country, but not to such a startling degree. The evidence is all over the newsroom. One editor keeps ice packs within reach. His inflamed tendons etch angry red lines on the top of his right hand. Several reporters have gone on disability leave for as long as 10 months. Still another stopped reporting altogether, transferring to another position at The Times that requires less typing. There are other costs as well. The Times has estimated that it will require at least $500,000 in workers' compensation funds to treat the existing cases. Computer disease has cut wide swaths across other workplaces, too. At an Oklahoma City office of The Hertz Corp., about 20% of the data processors who feed car-rental contract information into computers came down with tendinitis. They type all day, except during lunch and two 15-minute breaks. Speed counts. Last year, Hertz bought new computer tables, adjustable seats and wrist rests for that department. The jobs remained the same. Brenda Rigby, a company spokeswoman, says Hertz will not disclose the cost of the makeover or the number of employees affected. She says that the incidence of injury is down sharply but that about 10% of the processors are still troubled by pain and swelling. In at least two instances, federal safety inspectors have directed companies to redesign jobs and computer equipment. At a phone company in Denver, U.S. West Communications, union officials maintain that since 1986, 182 of 461 directory-assistance operators developed wrist and hand troubles from rapid keying to retrieve phone numbers from computer files. The number has been reduced to 15 active cases. The other complaint was leveled against the U.S. Postal Service Bulk Mail Center in Pittsburgh. Back and wrist disorders affected six of the 72 clerks there who direct packages along a conveyor belt by typing ZIP codes into computers, according to Gary Griess, who heads the Pittsburgh office of the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. At one time, employees had alternated half an hour of typing with half an hour of another task. In the two years after workers began to type continuously, the health problems appeared, Griess says. Both the Postal Service and the Denver phone company challenged the inspectors' conclusions, although both eventually negotiated settlements, agreeing to provide employee education and, possibly, new equipment. Nobody knows exactly how many people have computeritis. "There's a need to collect better data," says Louis Slesin, editor of the VDT News, a New York-based computer newsletter. He believes that the incidence of computeritis has been underreported. "If it's a small office, you may never hear about it," he says. "If it's not unionized, you may never hear about it." Some victims may not even know why they hurt. An Indiana journalist remembers thinking her wrist hurt because she popped the tops off seven cans of Diet Coke a day. She cut back on soda, but it didn't help. A former San Francisco discount stockbroker says she thought her sore neck and tingling arms were a result of aging. "I was starting to think I was too old to do the job," she says. As for Perez, "I had fallen down a couple of times and (doctors) suspected a fracture in my right hand." She filed for workers' compensation after an orthopedist diagnosed carpal tunnel syndrome and told her it was work-related. MEASURES HAVE been passed in at least nine states to regulate computer work. In California, purchasing guidelines for workstations have been adopted for state government, university and community college employees. The state Division of Occupational Safety and Health is studying whether to impose computer work rules on all workers. At the same time, Assemblyman Tom Hayden says he and colleague Tom Bates will try this year to get computeritis laws passed statewide. Such a law was enacted last June in Suffolk County, N.Y. It requires a 15-minute break for employees every three hours, employee education and specifications for new work furniture. Those solutions sound simple, but they involve fundamental changes in the way employees approach their work -- and they can be expensive. Consequently, says Laura Stock, of the Labor Occupational Health Program at the University of California, Berkeley: "It's a political battle more than a scientific one. It's a labor-management struggle. Will companies do what's needed on their own?" She doesn't think so. "That gap between what we know and agree upon, and what's actually in practice in the workplace is still there," Stock says. On the other hand, Columbia University professor Alan F. Westin believes that most offices are trying voluntarily to defuse the potential for harm. Westin studied the way 110 companies dealt with computer technology, surveying each firm between 1982 and summer, 1985, and between fall, 1985, and 1986. The first time, 75% failed to display much interest in the potential health hazards posed by computer work. The second time, more than 60% were taking steps to minimize the problems, steps "that might not satisfy the critics," Westin says, but that included distributing literature about computeritis and education about exercises and stretching. In some cases, however, the changes have come too late. Westin tells of a bank he surveyed, but chooses not to name, where half a dozen data processors in a department of 35 or 40 started blaming their computers and workstations for a range of aches and pains. Officials at the bank, "which had a reputation for having good employee relations," Westin says, "drew the conclusion that it was the attitude or malingering of those six." Only after 12 of the data processors were disabled did the bank replace its rigid furniture with adjustable desks and chairs, spending $2.5 million. The Times, too, is trying to quell its outbreak of computeritis. Newsroom employees are now required to watch a videotape demonstrating good workstation posture. They are given a brochure that urges them to take frequent breaks and describes equipment that can help prevent strain. The paper accommodates requests for adjustable chairs, shelves that lower keyboard height and personal computers with a lighter touch than the standard issue terminals. The Times is also experimenting with new keyboards and adjustable computer tables. Michael G. Manfro, The Times' safety director, says the pace has been slow because "it took a long time before everybody believed this was real." "They've been kind of inching along," says Sanders, the ergonomist who serves as a Times consultant. "It's unfortunate for the people that are in there, caught during the process." FOR MONTHS after the Whittier earthquake, I focused only on the majority of my colleagues going about their business -- my business. For the first time in my life, I was jealous of my friends when they did good work. I'm being left behind, I thought. I learned ways to conserve my capacity to use my hands. Steve washed dishes and did my other chores to leave me energy for work. I taped phone interviews and sent the cassettes to be transcribed. At some point, though, I had to type. I was used to hitting the keys at the same speed as the voice in my head that put the words together. Now I had to think about stopping periodically to rest; I had to remember to hold my neck straight and keep my shoulders from hunching; I had to stay alert for signs of fatigue that warned me to knock off for a few hours or even the rest of the day. At my physical therapy sessions, I lay on a treatment table in a hospital gown while Betsy Fleisher Terry pressed hard on my shoulder, arms and hands to loosen knotted tissue, relax muscles in spasm and firm up spots that she described as "boggy." To a healthy person, the rubbing would have felt like deep massage. For me, it was torture. I left feeling as if I had been beat up. A few months later, Terry told me it was time to regain my lost strength. Do wrist curls, she said, while you hold a 12-ounce can of tomato paste. Later, she suggested moving on to a 1-pound bag of spaghetti. Unfortunately, the next step was not garlic, but a 2-pound bag of dried beans. My exercise also included squeezing an orange sponge ball or Silly Putty. Slowly my endurance increased. From typing two or three minutes, then stopping for an hour until the pain died down, I got to the point where I could type for 20 minutes straight. In a few months, I often could type for 45 minutes and break for 20 minutes. I charted my progress with domestic triumphs, too. I could wash the dishes again. But I seldom felt like an achiever. Instead of listening to my understanding husband, parents and friends, I chose to pay attention to the sneers of those who thought I must be faking or crazy or a wimp. I stuffed myself with candy and cookies, gaining 7 pounds. I drove aimlessly around the city, giving myself pep talks. David Rosenzweig, then The Times' Metro editor, noticed my misery. He took me aside. What can you do that would help the paper but would not involve typing? he asked. And so I spent seven weeks in April and May speaking Spanish with a tutor, courtesy of The Times. I acquired a new reporting tool, and my healing sped along. I dropped down to two therapy sessions a week. I needed traction only a few times a month. I abandoned the splint, the despised symbol of my weakened state. Still, I'm a long way from normalcy. I've been typing for nearly half an hour now. If I don't stop, the puffiness in my elbows and forearms will give way to pain. The front of my right shoulder seems tender. The base of my right thumb is stiff; my wrist is aching too. If I don't stop . . . THERAPY OFFERS relief for Ola Bullock, but the pain always comes back. "My doctor told me not to give up," she says. "I would just hate to just stop working completely." Silvia Perez is back at full speed. Her right hand is much better now, but her left is sometimes numb. "Should this recur, what do I do?" she worries. "I'm a single mom. I have to have a job. Where do I go now where there's no typing and no computers?" As for me, Chandler says I have every reason to believe that someday I'll be working as much as I did before. I'll have to do it differently, that's all. I'll continue to exercise, to take frequent short breaks, to make sure my workstation doesn't force me into contortions that add to the pressure. "What you are looking at," he says, "is adaptation." I'll have setbacks, he has told me. But I have to test my limits. So I didn't panic when the pain intensified after I worked four hours straight on a deadline in late May. I simply stopped punching keys for three weeks until the soreness faded. In the middle of writing this story, I managed five six-day workweeks before I overdid it again. The result was another flare-up. This time, though, I rebounded even faster. For six days, I rested. And on the seventh day, I typed.
19890622000000000	COMPUTER FILE: SAFE WORK SPACE CAN AVERT INJURIES. One of the first things you learn upon acquiring a personal computer is how difficult it is to fit on a desk. There are all those parts -- the main computer box, a monitor, a keyboard, probably a printer and maybe an external disk drive or an external modem or even a CD-ROM drive. But there is a lot more to setting up a computer properly than just finding a place to put everything and enough electrical outlets to plug the equipment in. Your health and well-being may even be at stake. Federal, state and local officials across the nation have been looking into the growing number of computer-related repetitive motion injuries. Experts suggest several precautions for avoiding such injuries. One of the most important considerations is placing the keyboard and the monitor at comfortable heights for typing and viewing. You also need to put the computer unit where it can be easily switched on and off, with its floppy disk drive conveniently at hand. More often than not, what happens is that the monitor is placed on top of the computer unit, both are shoved to the back of the desk and the keyboard is set in front of them. The printer ends up wherever it will fit within stretching distance of the umbilical cable linking it to the computer. Several things can be wrong with that scenario, according to recommendations adopted by the American National Standards Institute. The basic ergonomic principles endorsed by ANSI are easy to describe: You should sit upright with your feet flat on the floor and your knees bent at about 90 degrees. Your lower back should be supported, and your arms should be at about a 90-degree angle when your fingers are on the keyboard. (ANSI standards say any forearm angle between 70 and 135 degrees is acceptable for keyboard work. However, medical and ergonomics experts that I have worked with say 90 degrees is the optimum.) Further, you should not have to look up at any part of your display screen. The top part of the screen (not the case) should be no higher than eye level. Depending on your size, it may be difficult to achieve that optimum position. You also need to have enough room under the desk or table for your knees and feet, preferably a space at least 24 inches wide and from 19 to 24 inches deep, depending on how long your legs are. The foundation for a good computer work space is a good, adjustable chair. A secretarial style chair is better than an executive style chair with big arms that interfere with arm movement while you work at the keyboard. "A well-designed chair will favorably affect posture, circulation, the amount of effort required to maintain posture and the amount of strain on the spine," according to ANSI standards. The standards also specify that "reclined posturesare acceptable, (but) they require that the chair provide adequate support." Well-designed chairs can be adjusted for seat height, back support and tilt angle. The minimum range of height adjustment should be from 16 to 20.5 inches, according to the ANSI standards. Seat width should be at least 18.2 inches, and the width of the lower back support should be at least 12 inches. The standards make no recommendation for height of the seat back. Chairs that have pneumatic tubes for height adjustment are easier to use but may tend to lose pressure and sink while you are seated unless the quality is very good. Chairs that use screws for mechanical adjustments are more difficult to change but stay where you put them. Chair adjustability is critical because that is how you assure that your hands and arms are at the proper height and angle for the keyboard height, if the keyboard surface is not adjustable. In addition, shorter people may find that when their chair is high enough, their feet can't rest flat on the floor. A variety of footrests are available to support your legs and feet in such cases. With adjustable furniture, proper keyboard height for most persons falls in the range from 23 to 28 inches high, according to ANSI standards. Few manufacturers offer such furniture, however, so you'll probably have to compensate with chair height. Most computer furniture has a single work surface to support keyboard, CPU and monitor. You should choose such furniture for proper typing height. The important thing to remember about the monitor is to keep it low. Looking down as low as 60 degrees below horizontal is acceptable. "People who wear bifocals or trifocals and who adopt a reclined posture may have a reduced range of acceptable viewing angles," the standards say. They also may have more problems with glare from ceiling lights. If you have room on the desk top, you usually can get the monitor at an acceptable height by putting the CPU to one side so that the monitor rests directly on the work surface. The CPU can also be placed on its side behind the monitor or beside it or under the desk, as long as you can still conveniently reach the disk drives. Stands to support the CPU on its side are available from computer dealers as are special extension cables if your power, keyboard or monitor cords are too short to reach. Common sense should dictate the width and depth of your work space. Certainly, it should be deep enough to house your computer equipment without forcing the keyboard into your lap. There is no standard acceptable depth, but my experience shows it to be a minimum of 24 inches, and 30 inches is preferable. A standard of 19.9 inches for width of a work surface was set by ANSI, but a lot of computers are wider than that. You shouldn't have much trouble finding furniture that is considerably wider, and the wider the better. If you find that your present setup doesn't meet these standards, you're not alone. I've been amazed at how rarely computer furniture actually does, including my own. It will be worth the effort and money to make things right, however, if you spend very much time at your machine. The ANSI publication, "American National Standard for Human Factors Engineering of Visual Display Terminal Workstations," is published by the Human Factors Society Inc., P.O. Box 1369, Santa Monica, Calif. 90406. Phone: (213) 394-1811. It is available for $25. Computer File welcomes readers' comments but regrets that the author cannot respond individually to letters. Write to Richard O'Reilly, Computer File, Los Angeles Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles, Calif. 90053.
19891128000000000	DESIGNERS SEEKING A SAFE COMPUTER KEYBOARD; ERGONOMICS: IDEAS KICKING AROUND ARE FOR A COMPUTER THAT WILL TRANSCRIBE WRITTEN OR SPOKEN WORDS. INNOVATIONS, HOWEVER, ARE MEETING RESISTANCE.. Seven years ago, Anthony Hodges added another vocation to an eclectic collection of careers that included stints as an environmentalist, fighter pilot and unsuccessful political candidate. Hodges, the son of a Linotype operator, became the inventor of an unconventional computer keyboard. His design, which he calls the Tony, took a standard Apple keyboard and added several adjustable features, enabling a user to split the keyboard down the middle and tilt each half upward. The "A" shape -- which looks like someone broke the keyboard over his knee -- can be adjusted to varying heights, which Hodges says helps eliminate hand and wrist injuries suffered by many workers who spend long hours in front of computer terminals. "I've had those pains," said Hodges, who lives in Atherton, just south of San Francisco. "Flat keyboards force your hands into unnatural 'praying mantis' positions. The Tony allows the machine to fit your hands, not the other way around." Hodges is one of a handful of iconoclasts promoting radical alternatives to today's conventional keyboard designs. Their devices -- which so far have been roundly rejected by the big U.S. keyboard makers -- range from variations on Hodges' split keyboard to keys that are moved much like a computer mouse. Like Hodges, most keyboard inventors say their passion for change has been spurred, in part, by an interest in reducing hand and wrist injuries -- known as repetitive strain injuries, or RSI -- experienced by thousands of computer users each year. Some medical experts believe that conventional flat keyboard designs may contribute to RSI. "Is the keyboard at fault? Of course it is," says Robert E. Markison, a San Francisco hand specialist and assistant professor of surgery at the University of California School of Medicine. "The keyboard (design) forces you to deviate your wrists, twist your forearms, shift your elbows and tense your shoulders. You've set up a whole series of events that defy the normal position and functioning of the hand." At one company, U.S. West Communications, a group of telephone operators has filed a product-liability suit against Computer Consoles Inc. of Rochester, N.Y., because they feel that the computer design contributed to their RSI. The 2-year-old suit is pending. While old-fashioned typewriters required more force to pound the keys, these actions actually may have been less damaging than working on today's keyboards. The lighter touch of computer keys enables workers to type at high speeds, and these repetitive motions, experts say, can overwork a group of tendons in the hands and wrists, increasing the risk of RSI. At the same time, Markison and others acknowledge that keyboard design is just one of many factors that may contribute to RSI, also known as cumulative trauma disorders or repetitive motion injuries. "The keyboard has to be considered as part of a whole system (of workplace conditions)," such as keyboard positioning and a user's work habits, says Thomas Armstrong, director of the Center for Ergonomics at the University of Michigan. "People are looking for a magic bullet to make the problems go away. But even the best keyboards, under certain conditions where keying is repetitive enough, will result in some problems," Armstrong explained. Keyboard manufacturers take a tougher line. "It's true that a person can suffer from using a computer, but that problem has nothing to do with the keyboard," said Rita Black, a spokeswoman for International Business Machines Corp., which makes most of the keyboards sold with its computers. Computer users can minimize exposure to RSI with proper seating posture and equipment positioning, Black said. IBM and other major manufacturers say they have no plans to radically change the keyboards used by 25 million office workers. If big changes are made within the next decade, it will probably be to eliminate keyboards altogether, substituting other inputting devices that convert handwriting or human speech directly to computer print, said Maryann Karinch, a spokeswoman for the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Assn., a Washington, D.C.-based trade group. Hodges and other innovators admit that keyboard-makers have not exactly been breaking down their doors with offers over the past few years. Since the subject of workers with RSI came up, Hodges said, he has gotten responses from company officials such as, "Let them take aspirin -- it's cheaper." Still, Hodges said he has been approached by a Japanese company (he refuses to go offshore) and several U.S. telecommunications companies recently have expressed interest in trying his keyboard. "Why? Because they're starting to get sued" by users of flat keyboards, he said. Experts say that for the most part, manufacturers have resisted changing the basic keyboard design simply because it's been that way for so long. Experts are skeptical that innovators can lure major manufacturers into licensing or partnership agreements. "Keyboard changes are driven by manufacturing costs," said Harry L. Snyder, professor of human factors engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute. To be competitive, a new keyboard design must be produced at roughly the same cost as an average personal computer keyboard -- about $20 apiece, Snyder said. If sold individually to retail customers, PC keyboards often are priced between $200 and $300, although more sophisticated keyboards for corporate office networks often range between $600 and $1,000. Even if costs can be driven down, experts say, the next generation of innovative keyboards may be eclipsed by computers that read handwriting or transcribe speech.
19891206000000000	P.M. BRIEFING; NEW YORK PASSES TOUGH VDT LAW. The City Council has approved legislation to protect the health and safety of more than 12,000 city workers who use video display terminals. The bill is the toughest VDT law in the nation and the first law of its kind in a major city, according to the New York City Video Display Terminal Coalition of labor unions and occupational safety and health groups. The bill, approved Tuesday, mandates that VDT operators at city agencies be given a 15-minute break whenever they are required to work at a terminal for more than two consecutive hours. Under the law, VDT workers with certain medical conditions -- including pregnancy -- would be allowed to obtain transfers. Some studies have suggested prolonged VDT exposure increases risk of miscarriage.
19900319000000000	COLUMN ONE; AN OFFICE DESIGNED FOR PEOPLE; TECHNOLOGISTS MAKE COMPUTER EQUIPMENT AND FURNITURE BUILDERS MAKE DESKS. THE TWO MEET ALL TOO INFREQUENTLY.. When the renowned furniture designer Bill Stumpf teaches his industrial design course, he always begins with two slides. The first shows a state-of-the-art office complete with dimmed lights, sleek furniture modules and glowing computer screens. The second shows writer E. B. White sitting on a wooden bench at a wooden table in a shed in front of an open, bay-view window and typing on a manual typewriter. The students, Stumpf says, have little trouble deciding that the Cape Cod fishing shack is the far better working environment. The two images illustrate the dilemma faced by the computer industry, the furniture industry and, indeed, the entire business community as a result of the desktop terminal's inexorable takeover of the office. Somehow, a way must be found to meld the ever-expanding power of the computer into a working environment that is physically comfortable and mentally stimulating. Stumpf calls the missing element in office design "civility." Doug Patton, head of the product-design company Patton Design Enterprises in Costa Mesa, says that a work space should be "open, creative and fun." Jim Stewart, manager for advanced design at Apple Computer Corp., talks of the need for "collaborative, inter-active work tools." Nearly everyone involved in furniture and computer design pays lip service, at least, to the notion that the office of the future must do a better job of meeting "the real needs of the worker" than the office of today. There is little agreement, however, as to just how radically the office needs to be changed. Many in product design speak disdainfully of American business for not taking the problem seriously, and ominously predict that forward-thinking European and Japanese companies will soon fill the gap. Furniture and computer industry executives say, on the other hand, that they are moving as quickly as market realities will allow. That debate is likely to be fueled today, when a revolutionary office concept, sponsored by Apple Computer and developed by Patton Design, makes its debut at the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles. The prototype, dubbed Workspace 2000, aims to produce a comfortable, personalized atmosphere for creative work by integrating the most sophisticated computer equipment into office furniture. Patton said that Workspace 2000 will do nothing less then free the worker from the "ball and chain" of desk, telephone and terminal. It will allow people to wander freely, computerized "pads" in hand, among tables that are really touch-sensitive, voice-activated computer screens, office partitions that double as video-conference consoles and desks that contain hidden copiers and fax machines. "Technology has been making people change to meet its requirements, but it should be the other way around," said Patton, a muscular, mustachioed 36-year-old. "We need to break the existing product-furniture-environment boundaries." Just as software advances have made computers more accessible, Patton said, the entire office must be overhauled to make it more "user friendly" and allow for truly collaborative work. Jim Stewart, Apple's manager for advanced design research and the moving force behind the company's "advanced environments" program, would not say whether Apple was developing special products for the Workspace 2000 concept. But he emphasized that all parts of the system -- from the large, flat video screens to the wireless communications network that links everything -- are technically feasible today. "When we presented this to the product development people (at Apple), the first thing they said was: 'There are a lot of things here that can't be done,' " Stewart recalled. "But, on closer examination, everything here is doable and has been shown in public." The Workspace 2000 model has a desk, a two-man conference table and an adjustable surface that resembles a drafting table when horizontal and a blackboard when upright -- each of which has a computer screen for a surface. There is also a curved partition that functions as a video screen and also can be clear or opaque, depending on whether the worker wants privacy. Hand-held computer pads can be spoken into or used with an electronic pen. A pad can be inserted into a slot in one of the other devices, mounted on a chair arm or placed on a free-standing pedestal that contains a re-charger. Other components are miniature video-conference equipment and a "power pillar" for optical data storage. Though few people have seen Workspace 2000 in advance of its public debut -- Apple kept it under wraps for well over a year after its completion -- those who have are enthusiastic. "It's dynamite, beautiful, a very thorough analysis of the human being and how he is going to interact with his environment," said Ron Pierce, a designer with S. G. Hauser Associates in Calabasas and president of the local chapter of the Industrial Designers Society of America. "It's one of the most exciting concepts I've seen in a long time," said Lucie Young, an editor with Design magazine in London, which is planning a major feature on Workspace 2000. "The office furniture industry has recently seen only superficial changes. This could revolutionize the way people work." Katherine Bennett, a Los Angeles-based industrial designer, called Workspace 2000 "an excellent study," and added: "This project is user-driven. Too many manufacturers and designers are technology-driven." But not everyone is so enthusiastic about integrating furniture and computers, or, indeed, about making any drastic change in the physical infrastructure of the office. Aside from efforts such as an experimental secretarial station commissioned by Xerox Corp. and built by Egg Design of Cypress, there have been few well-financed explorations of radical office concepts. George Wilmot, vice president for advanced research at office furniture maker Knoll International, said his company had concluded that "embedding computer equipment in any significant way in the furniture is not a good idea." He said that assessment was dictated by analysis of the way computers are really used, and by the simple reality that computer technology is changing so quickly that it would be impractical to incorporate it into furniture that might be in use for a decade or more. "The philosophy at Knoll is to find a means to house computer equipment," Wilmot said. Gus Rodriguez, manager for furniture systems at Steelcase Corp., noted that both the computer and the office furniture industries are relatively young. "We are both still going through our growing pains, and integration will really come only when we reach a certain level of stability," Rodriguez said. "We are involved in several projects in that area, but we have to take a step-by-step approach." A structural problem also inhibits work on computer-furniture integration: Computer companies are in the computer business and furniture companies are in the furniture business, and the two meet all too infrequently. Peter Bressler, president of the Industrial Designers Society of America, noted that "the furniture industry is close to fashion, and the computer industry is close to engineering. These are two very polarized perspectives." Stumpf also pointed to "a gap in the field of interest between the computer and the furniture industries." He said that the Ethospace office system he designed for Herman Miller Inc., his primary client, was supposed to have computer screens in the office partitions, but collaboration with the computer company Unisys had not worked out. Stewart of Apple said it would take "visionary business relationships" to bring something like Workspace 2000 to fruition. Although some such collaborations are in the works, representatives of Apple and other firms would not discuss them. But many in the design community believe there has simply been too little commitment, too little money and too little daring in the whole area of office design. Steve Diskin, a Los Angeles product designer and a partner in Mega-Erg, an office-environment think tank, said that the office furniture field is conservative and currently is characterized by "confusion and timidity." Diskin said he fears that the lack of innovation in office design will soon come back to haunt U.S. industry. "It's an exact parallel to what happened in Detroit (automobile industry)," he said. "They said 'the public isn't ready for these things' and then the Japanese came in and ran away with it because they were a little bolder." Bressler, who emphasized that he was speaking for himself and not his association, criticized the furniture industry as being "rather superficial when it comes to really dealing with technology." Indeed, while the furniture companies boast about the advances they have made in "cord-management" -- accommodation of electronic cables in office furniture systems -- many designers virtually spit the words "cord-management" as an example of, in Bressler's words, "designing a system for yesterday." Computer-furniture integration, pioneered in the 1970s by the Italian designer Mario Bellini in studies for the office equipment maker Olivetti, is only a sub-set of the office-of-the-future debate. As Patton and others are quick to point out, the real issue is creating an office that meets the needs of workers. The trouble is that it's not always obvious what the office worker really needs, as opposed to what the boss surmises he might need. Patton says that in the typical modern office, "objective needs, such as the ability to compose and manipulate data, are well met, but subjective needs -- for comfort, security, ease of use, person-to-person contact, privacy, portability -- are not well met." Pinning down these "subjective" needs is not easy. Although furniture and computer companies brim with "human factors" specialists who analyze everything from the ideal height of a desk to the proper lighting of a computer screen, ergonomics -- defined in Webster's dictionary as "the study of the problems of people in adjusting to their environment" -- is still in its infancy. "We're sorry to see that no one is investing in real ergonomic studies," said Charles W. Pelly, president of Designworks USA of Newbury Park, Calif. "It's a finger-pointing situation that goes all the way up to the architects. We can't get pure research money from anyone to try and look at these problems." In the area of basic physical comfort and safety, some progress has been made. The Santa Monica-based Human Factors Society has developed a standard for computer workstations that addresses issues such as adjustability of furniture and screen resolution. Biomechanics Corp. of America, a New York-based start-up company, has built sensing tools that can measure stresses on the human body with more precision than ever before. The best answer to the repetitive-motion and vision problems associated with too much work at a computer screen is to free the worker from sitting at a terminal all day, many designers say. And more subtle issues, such as allowing for the right mix of privacy and human contact -- or creating a "feel" as nice as the one in E. B. White's fishing shack -- are even more elusive. Stumpf said that "many of the techno-approaches to the office are a complete misrepresentation of what people really want." Defining those real needs, he said, is often a matter of common sense. Stewart of Apple said that a main purpose of the advanced-design program was "need-finding," and that he tries to "use design as a catalyst" to looking at the problems. Patton said the approach he and three colleagues took in Workspace 2000 was based on both instinct and analysis. "A lot of it is very emotional," he said. "Design combines what is very rational and logical with what feels right." The "rational" analysis for Workspace 2000 produced a set of design goals, including eliminating redundancies of function, restoring the ability to move about freely, creating comfortable settings for conversations and group interaction, preserving privacy and allowing the option of customizing each work area. On a more instinctive level, each component of the Workspace 2000 system is a "metaphor" for a proven device such as a blackboard, a drafting table, a conventional school desk or a note pad. Patton said he hoped that such familiar forms would counteract the impersonal character of computer technology. Of course, even if Workspace 2000 or some other concept were deemed the ideal office of the future, there is always the troubling question of how much an employer will pay to provide a "fun" -- or even a healthful -- office environment. Something like Patton's project would cost tens of thousands of dollars per unit if it were built today, a price far beyond the reach of most potential buyers. Corporate facilities managers such as Dan Derby at Hewlett-Packard realize, however, that an attractive working environment is more than just nice. It is an increasingly important tool in recruiting not only executives but also professionals such as engineers, lawyers and commercial artists. "We have to pay much more attention to the people's environment now -- there's no question that it's part of the recruiting process," Derby said. And Diskin of Mega-Erg said that new office designs could help address a key economic issue in the office today: the cost of floor space. If the desk is also a computer there is that much more room for everything else. Patton doesn't spend much time talking about the economic practicalities, though. He is more interested in the theory of the office revolution. "A lot of these ideas are embryonic," he said, "but we're trying to create an inspirational workplace to elevate individual and group interactions. "Suddenly, with this, you're not chained to your desk any more."  The Office of Tomorrow The office furniture envisioned by Patton Design infuses computer functionally into sleek modern forms. All parts of the system are linked in a wireless network, and plug-in program modules allow use of a variety of software applications.  Translator A curved screen that can change from clear glass to a solid-color privacy screen at the touch of a button. The screen is also used for teleconferencing and can simultaneously display data or additional images.  Counselor A worktable for two with a surface that can display data and accept input from either user.  Pad A portable battery-powered computer similar in size and shape to a note pad. Data can be entered by speaking to it, by handwriting on the pad's display surface or by scanning an image into it. The pad can be connected or "docked," with all other components in the system.  Work Board A flat panel display that can be used vertically as an "electonic chalkboard" or horizontally as a work surface. Includes a telephone, fax, scanner and printer.  Com-Chair A special arm designed to fit most types of workstation chairs provides another plug-in receptacle for the pad. The arm folds down andout of the way when not in use.
19900522000000000	BUSINESS PULSE: A SPECIAL REPORT; COMPUTERS; VDTS CAN BE A PAIN IN THE BACK, WRIST, EYES . . .. Behind the gleaming glass of the office buildings that dot Orange County, executives and secretaries alike toil away at computer terminals -- an activity that seems safe enough. One would think the hazardous duty at such locales was limited to the window-washers. But what appears to be the fastest-growing occupational safety problem in the country has more to do with screens than scaffolds. People who spend a lot of time working at video display terminals are increasingly being afflicted with a range of maladies that are often grouped under the heading "computeritis." The problems posed by computers range from relatively minor eye or back strains to serious muscular-skeletal disorders, such as painful and debilitating carpal tunnel syndrome. And the jury is still out on the question of whether low-level magnetic radiation from VDTs can cause reproductive disorders in women. Vicki O'Neil of Anaheim Hills was among the 10% of the respondents to The Times Orange County Poll who reported health problems from working at a computer. Her eyesight, she said, has definitely deteriorated during the eight years she has worked with a computer as an administrative assistant. She also complains of constant fatigue. "I just wasn't made to sit in front of one of these things all day," O'Neil said. She also believes two miscarriages were linked to constant exposure to VDTs, although she concedes that she cannot prove a link. But she suffered another problem that everyone associated with computeritis knows to be real: "If you tell someone their problems are from the computer, they laugh at you." No one at the Bureau of Labor Statistics is laughing, though. The federal agency reported a sharp increase in "cumulative trauma" disorders in its latest count of occupational illnesses, with 115,400 cases nationwide. That category, which accounts for 48% of all workplace disorders, includes injuries from a wide variety of jobs that require constant repetition of an activity. It includes such diverse occupations as meatpacking, piano playing, supermarket checking and newspaper reporting. In 1987 these repetitive motion problems accounted for just 38% of all disorders, and in 1981 they represented only 18%. Experts are convinced the dramatic increase is due to computer-related injuries. Many employers have begun to recognize some of the physical problems associated with heavy computer usage. Carpal tunnel syndrome results from inflammation of the tendons that pass through a "tunnel" of bones in the wrist and can cause severe pain in the hands and forearms. Back and neck pain are also frequent complaints of computer users. And eyestrain, including claims of permanent vision damage, are the most common malady of VDT users. Many computer-related problems can be alleviated, at least in part, if the height and distance of screens are adjusted properly, if good lighting and good seating is used and if workers are educated about proper posture. Forward-thinking companies already have programs in place to make the computer workplace a safer one. The Los Angeles Times, which has had numerous complaints of computeritis among reporters and editors, is currently taking part in a major National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health study of VDT maladies. "The business community has been responding, but we still have a very large number of people working in bad situations," said Laura Stock, associate director of the Labor Occupational Health Program at UC Berkeley and a leading authority on computeritis. The Santa Monica-based Human Factors Society has developed a set of standards for adjustable workstations that take people's physical needs into account, and they were adopted by the national standards organizations. But the California Occupational Safety and Health Administration Standards Board refused last year to establish mandatory guidelines for safe workstations. Union and other worker representatives on the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee on Visual Display Terminals had recommended such action, but the industry representatives declined to go along. The Cal/OSHA Standards Board instead recommended that standards be developed for training workers on proper VDT use. The board said no conclusive evidence had been presented that working at VDTs is a "hazard," defined as leading to permanent physical injury. It did acknowledge, however, that significant problems exist with regard to eyestrain and muscular-skeletal ailments. Stock and other VDT experts emphasize that while workstation design is important, many of the problems can be alleviated only through changes in the work itself. "If people are doing the same thing all day long, that's going to lead to problems," Stock said. She cites the need for changes in "job design" that will allow some variation in workers' activities. Even more controversial than repetitive motion injuries from computers are the persistent concerns that radiation from terminals can cause reproductive disorders. Studies have shown that the levels of "ionizing" radiation, or X-rays, produced by computer terminals are too small to be a problem. But the same cannot be said for low-level magnetic radiation given off by VDTs. Little is known about the effects of long-term exposure to these waves, though short-term exposure is generally agreed to be harmless. Two major studies of the effects of magnetic radiation on pregnant women -- one by NIOSH, the other by Mt. Sinai Hospital in New York, are now getting under way. But some fear that even these studies may be inconclusive, because so many factors -- including the stress produced by working at a VDT -- can potentially cause pregnancy problems. In the meantime, the most workers can do is push for screens that can be adjusted and equipped with anti-glare devices, educate themselves about proper posture and try to take frequent breaks away from the terminal. Mary Anne Brown, program director for the Labor Occupational Safety and Health program at UCLA, said her organization developed a training program to show workers how they can rearrange their workstations and their work, even if management won't invest in expensive new furniture or change job descriptions. Brown noted that computeritis "is still a new area, and a lot of industrial hygienists and safety engineers haven't thought much about it." A key step for many employees, though, is partially psychological: Don't let anyone laugh at what most recognize to be very serious problems. HOW TO MINIMIZE VDT-RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS Arrange your workstation properly * Feet flat on the floor, knees at 90 degree angle. * Back against seat, slightly reclined. * Keyboard at elbow height, elbows at 90 degree angle. * Top of screen slightly below eye level. * Keep screen clean, adjust contrast high and brightness low. * Adjust screen position or use glare screen to reduce reflection. Take a break every one to two hours * Stand up and stretch. Walk around. * Look at distant objects more than 20 feet away. * Vary work activities. * Do special stretching exercises. Ask for special equipment * Wrist rest. * Alternate keyboard. * Foot rest. * Glare screen. * Terminal hood. * Screen cleaner. * Special eyeglasses. * Telephone headset. * Document holder. Source: VDT Coalition
19900530000000000	BRIEFLY. EC Adopts VDT Safety Regulations: The 12-nation European Community adopted sweeping safety regulations for workers who use video display terminals, including periodic breaks and the right to regular eye examinations. The rules also call for glare-free and swiveling screens, "adequate spacing" between characters and lines, and adjustable seats with a footrest if requested. VDTs put into service after Dec. 31, 1992, must meet the new regulations, and existing equipment must be modified by the end of 1996.
19900606000000000	STUDY LINKS COMPUTERS TO INJURIES AT NEWSPAPERS. A team of government and university researchers has concluded that there is a "significant association" between typing at computer keyboards at Newsday and New York Newsday and the incidence of repetitive-strain injuries -- widespread occupational illnesses resulting from repeated motions. The yearlong study of Newsday employees, conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and the University of Michigan, found no one cause responsible for the injuries. It identified several job-related factors -- including workstation design and individual work habits -- as potential risks associated with repetitive-strain injuries, or RSI. In a preliminary report issued earlier this year, NIOSH-Michigan researchers found that 40% of more than 800 employees surveyed reported symptoms of RSI, including pain experienced in hands, wrists, elbows, shoulders or neck. The study was jointly requested and paid for by Newsday and the Graphics Communication International Union Local 406, which represents about half of Newsday's and New York Newsday's 3,100 full-time employees. The study, the first comprehensive survey of RSI in the newspaper industry, concluded that computer-terminal use at a newspaper office presented "a hazard" to workers' health. The Newsday study found that reporters had twice as many RSI cases as other groups of employees who work at computer terminals, and that those who typed faster, spent longer periods of time typing and took fewer work breaks were more likely to get injured. Researchers said some cramped workstations -- including video-display terminals, desks, chairs and other equipment -- could contribute to RSI by constraining worker postures for long periods of typing. "But if you just concentrate on workstations and equipment, you will be disappointed (in solving RSI problems)," said Barbara Silverstein, the study's principal investigator from Michigan. "You have to deal with the pace and way work is organized." RSI is now the leading cause of occupational illness in the United States, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In 1988, 115,400 cases of RSI were reported nationwide, representing 48% of all workplace illnesses. Such injuries also have been widespread in assembly-line jobs. Newsday has implemented several of the study's recommendations, said Assistant Managing Editor Robert Keane, including creation of a labor-management committee for editorial workers and recently launched a training program, starting with managers and new workers, Keane said. Newsday is owned by Times Mirror Co., which also owns The Times.
19900910000000000	SCIENCE / MEDICINE; POLARIZATION BRINGS CONSERVATION TO LIGHT; ENERGY: PLASTIC PANELS INVENTED THREE DECADES AGO CAN CUT A BUILDING'S LIGHT BILLS IN HALF AND TRIM 25% OFF AIR-CONDITIONING BILLS.. Myron Kahn can hardly control his excitement these days, what with President Bush actually saying the words "energy conservation" on national television in response to the Mideast oil crisis. Every time Americans get nervous about all the energy they waste, Kahn, of Tarzana, receives a flurry of orders for the polarizing panels he invented three decades ago -- thin lenses of plastic that can cut an office building's light bills by up to half and trim another 25% off the air-conditioning bills. Interest is also mounting, albeit slowly, in various pockets of the country. Several utilities in California and other states have begun offering rebates to businesses that install the energy-saving panels. And in Sacramento, new statewide building guidelines for lighting will allow builders to opt for polarizing panels and other innovative techniques over traditional lighting systems. The way polarization works is simple enough: The clear panels contain laminated layers that convert randomly vibrating light rays into a vertical pattern. Installed below ceiling lights, the panels transform the bothersome horizontal light rays that ricochet off desktops and computer screens and cause what we know as glare. With glare reduced, the eye sees richer colors and details. And when the useless horizontal rays become vertically polarized, they are better absorbed by objects and reflected back to the eye, further aiding vision. That is why art museums often use natural lighting, and why artists love to paint under blue skies. Sunlight is automatically polarized during its passage through the Earth's atmosphere, creating a superior setting, here on the planet's surface, for the eye to judge color, texture and detail. Conversely, on an overcast day the polarizing effects are disrupted. The result is glare. That is why people often squint under a slate-gray sky. What on earth does this have to do with cutting light bills by as much as half in the American workplace? Glare creates most of the visual problems in the office or factory. According to several lighting experts, once the light is polarized, employees can see their computers, desktop papers, factory equipment or other work surfaces so much better that about one-quarter to one-half of the overhead light bulbs can simply be removed. "It's an elegant and simple technology for minimizing glare," said lighting researcher Robert Sardinsky of the Colorado-based Rocky Mountain Institute. "The real value is that if you reduce glare, you can reduce the quantity of light. A bright room is not the answer to good vision." Not only are lighting bills slashed, according to independent studies, but the considerable heat generated by overhead light bulbs is reduced. That means air conditioners can be turned down, further cutting electrical costs. Employees working beneath polarizing panels also routinely report fewer headaches and reduced tension once glare is controlled. Today, from IBM's complex in Lisbon, Portugal, to the Department of Water and Power headquarters in downtown Los Angeles, buildings that were once electricity hogs have gone on the energy diet prescribed by Kahn. More than 30 million square feet of the desktop-size polarizing panels, selling for about $15 each, have been installed in 4,000 buildings worldwide since Kahn, 73, invented and patented them in the 1960s. Which brings us to why Kahn, deeply troubled by events unfolding in Iraq and what they portend for the country's energy supply, is so keenly monitoring the White Houses's sudden interest in conservation. For all its energy-saving properties, polarized light has never been widely accepted in America, where the major lighting conglomerates and large utility companies have generally pushed for the sale of more energy, more light bulbs and more lighting devices -- not less. Lighting industry spokesmen contend that they are waiting for more scientific proof that polarization significantly improves vision as it reduces glare. But the same groups have eagerly popularized other glare-control devices, from metal louvers to prismatic panels, without waiting for scientific documentation of significantly improved vision, Kahn says. "The industries who benefit from selling unnecessary lamps, lighting fixtures and power have a stranglehold on America's future," he says. "All the skyscrapers going up today are using parabolic fixtures and other energy-wasting devices that create glare. It's going to cost a fortune in light bills over the lifetime of a building. But worse than that, we're using up energy as if it were water." When it comes to conserving electricity, the economic stakes are indeed high. The Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental and conservation research group, has estimated that California's commercial ratepayers would save $2 billion a year if all existing and new buildings were outfitted with basic energy-efficient lighting systems now readily available. The calculations did not include polarized lighting. The estimated $2-billion saving is equivalent to the electricity generated in a year by 4 1/2 oil-fueled power plants. The reduced demand would also mean that $7.5 billion worth of construction in new power plants could be avoided, according to the research group. Because polarizing panels can achieve energy savings of 25% to 50%, they could play a meaningful role in cutting electricity demands in the United States. But Kahn faces an uphill battle, in part because most lighting designers have never even heard of polarizing panels. Polarized lighting is so little known within the lighting industry that Southern California Edison Co.'s new demonstration laboratory -- which purports to be a showcase for the latest in energy-efficient lighting techniques -- has no display on the benefits of polarization. Nor did the Natural Resources Defense Council, which is often on the cutting edge of new conservation techniques, include polarization in its high-tech lighting lab, opened in Seattle last year. One of the agency's researchers, who asked not to be named, said, "I don't know how this type of polarizing works, or what it is supposed to do for energy conservation." Even graduates of top engineering schools still mistakenly try to correct glare in the workplace by throwing more artificial light into a room, according to lighting engineer Bill Jones, director of Lighting Research Laboratory in Orange. "The last thing you should do is the first thing most people try -- attacking bad vision with even more lighting," Jones said. "There's just a tremendous lack of education out there among people who really should know better." Lighting experts say much of the ignorance stems from the fact that the Illuminating Engineering Society, an influential trade organization, has resisted pressure from Kahn and others to include recommendations for polarized lighting systems in its specifications manual. The society's manual is a bible for American contractors, architects, engineers and interior designers when they create lighting systems for buildings. H. Richard Blackwell, a world authority on lighting who has written hundreds of papers on the subject, said his studies in the 1970s, for which he won a prestigious Gold Medal award, showed that polarizing panels improved vision and required far less light than the room brightness levels recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society. "Illumination standards for buildings still do not include the information we had more than 15 years ago, and this strikes me as the most ridiculous thing in the world," said Blackwell, a professor emeritus at Ohio State University. "I fought hard for fair play for polarization . . . but the vested interests did not want to hear that less lamps and less lights were needed. "My former students are now running the IES, and they seem to have developed bad habits. My feeling is that because national productivity and global energy are involved, it's no time for them to be acting cute." Don Thomas, IES president and an executive of GTE-Sylvania, said the issue is more complex than the society's critics make it. While agreeing that polarizing panels are an effective shield against glare and allow reduced lighting, Thomas said the IES is not in a position to decide if polarization provides better vision than competing glare-control techniques. "We need Myron's help, not his opposition," Thomas said. "We need money and support to research these things." He denied a frequent charge by critics that the IES has fallen into the same profit-motivated syndrome that afflicted Detroit car manufacturers, who failed for years to make American automobiles gas-efficient and were finally forced to do so by the government during the 1970s oil crisis. "That's an unfair charge," Thomas said. "It's not good marketing to hoodwink the public into buying more when it's not needed." (The IES bases its recommendations on the light measurement known as foot-candles, a formula arrived upon in the 1930s that is not correlated to vision, but simply assesses the brightness thrown off by a given light source. The society's recommended light levels for a given task, from sewing to typing, were increased steadily from the 1950s until the 1970s oil crisis.) Many conservation experts fear that once the current oil crisis subsides, energy-efficient technologies that have been struggling for national recognition, such as polarizing panels, will lose their momentum. A number of other forces are at play, however, that may help elevate polarized lighting to the consumer's shopping list of environmentally conscious products. Utility companies in Massachusetts and California have begun offering rebates to businesses that install polarizing panels to cut electricity use. The data-processing industry, hoping to reduce computer-screen glare that causes headaches and impedes worker productivity, is looking for ways to adapt the principles of polarized lighting to computer equipment. And Suffolk County in New York has approved laws to protect employees at video-display terminals by using overhead polarized panels to improve vision and reduce glare. Moreover, California's Energy Commission, a national trend-setter, last month published new statewide lighting guidelines, which recommend that designers install lighting based upon how well the eye actually sees, instead of relying solely on the Illuminating Engineering Society's standards for room brightness. Aimed at promoting energy conservation, the new guidelines recommend as an option to the longtime IES standards a visual performance measurement developed by Blackwell known as equivalent spherical illumination. "You might say the new guidelines pry the door open for intelligent lighting technology a little bit," said lighting engineer Jones, a member of the advisory committee that wrote the guidelines, and a fellow of the Illuminating Engineering Society, "but not nearly enough."  POLARIZING LIGHT  Polarized light panels can reduce energy costs and improve effective vision by reducing surface reflections and glare. Here's a look at light waves and how they are polarized.  Normal Light  Normal light beams consist of rays vibrating in random directions. The waves vibrating vertically produce better contrast and color, enhancing vision. Horizontal waves produce glare.  Polarized light  Polarized light consists of waves vibrating in primarily one plane. Normal light can be polarized using a special multi-layer filter which permits vertically vibrating planes of light to pass through. Most important, the multi-layer filter causes light traveling the horizontal plane to bounce back and forth until it is converted to vertical-plane light, which then passes through the filter. This system is different from linear polarized sunglasses, which block out light vibrating in the horizontal plane.
19901227000000000	SAN FRANCISCO MAYOR LAUNCHES COMPUTER SAFETY LAW. Mayor Art Agnos today signed the nation's strictest law regulating video display terminal use by workers, despite a political rival's last-minute charges that the ordinance is illegal. The law requires 15-minute breaks and other safety measures, including proper lighting, anti-glare screens and adjustable furniture and equipment for VDT users. Tom Hsieh, a city supervisor opposing the measure, charged Wednesday that the ordinance violates the city charter. But Jonathan Holtzman, special assistant in the city attorney's office, said it clearly does not. "I am gravely concerned that the city is about to enact a law that is extremely vulnerable to legal challenge," Hsieh said. Hsieh said a section of the city charter mandates that supervisors can't make changes in working conditions for city employees until the city's civil service commission makes various studies. But Holtzman said the section cited by Hsieh applies only to changes in their pay. The law is to take effect in 30 days. It applies to employees of private businesses and city workers. Opponents of the ordinance said the law would be so costly -- an estimated $36 million to about $70 million citywide -- that it could drive some business away.
19920124000000000	FT  24 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): New rules governing use of VDUs criticised. HEALTH and safety rules covering an estimated 7m workers who use visual display units (VDUs) launched yesterday immediately came under attack from trade unions and environmental health officers. Unions claimed that the new rules provided too many loopholes for employers and failed to meet the requirements of a European Community directive. At the same time, the Institution of Environmental Health Officers warned that the new regulations might lead to safety inspectors spending too much time visiting offices and neglecting more dangerous premises. The new rules, which are published in a consultation document by the Health and Safety Executive, cover the design of desks and chairs, as well as the provision of work breaks and eye tests for workers who use VDUs. The TUC warned that the proposed regulations would not meet EC standards. Mr Alan Tuffin, general secretary of the UCW postal workers' union and chairman of the TUC's health and safety committee, said the TUC would be lobbying unions throughout the EC on the issue. Mr Tuffin is also a commissioner on the Health and Safety Commission. Unions claim that thousands of VDU workers will be excluded from the regulations because the definition of a regular user has been too narrowly defined. They also say that the proposals would not entitle all VDU workers to a full eye test. The Institution of Environmental Health Officers said it was concerned that office workers would become anxious as a result of the new rules. That would mean greater pressure on environmental health officers to respond to queries and complaints, taking away resources from high-risk premises. Work with Display Screen Equipment - Proposals for Regulations and Guidance. Health and Safety Executive. Units 3 and 5-9, Grain Industrial Estate, Harlow St, Liverpool L8 4UH. Free.
19920205000000000	FT  05 FEB 92 / UK News (Employment): Both sides to appeal in RSI test case. BOTH SIDES of a legal test case over repetitive strain injury (RSI) involving former BT keyboard operators are appealing, it emerged yesterday. The NCU telecommunications workers' union said it was to appeal against some aspects of the judgment, issued in December. BT announced last month that it had lodged an appeal against the order to pay damages to the operators. The case is being watched closely by employers, unions and RSI sufferers. Previous cases have been settled out of court. The painful and sometimes debilitating condition which affects arms and hands has mainly affected blue-collar employees in the past but is being linked increasingly to keyboard work. BT has taken the unusual step of giving financial help to the NCU so that it can defend the appeal. BT said that was in recognition of the case's wider importance and the 'hefty' costs involved. The former operators were awarded Pounds 6,000 damages each for pain and suffering. Loss of earnings have yet to be calculated. The county court in the City of London ruled that BT had failed to provide adequate desks and chairs for the operators and had failed to ensure correct posture. The NCU's appeal concerns the court's judgment on working practices. The court found that the way operators were paid and monitored and the long hours worked had contributed to RSI. It ruled, however, that BT could not have been expected to have known about the risks during the early 1980s, when the injuries were sustained. The union is contesting the finding.
19920908000000000	FT  08 SEP 92 / The answer might just be blowing in the wind: The long search for a cure to 'sick buildings'. DUST from insulation used in most air-conditioned offices has been strongly linked to 'sick building syndrome', the flu-like symptoms which afflict thousands of office workers. US scientists claim to have found a significant link between a single physical factor and the problems reported by staff. The factor is said to be a particular type of man-made mineral fibre used in non-domestic insulation products. The World Health Organisation estimates that 'sick building syndrome' affects a third of offices in Europe and north America. Dr Alan Hedge, who led the study of nine large private-sector buildings at the design and environmental analysis department of Cornell University in New York said: 'It is now clear that there is a link between mineral fibres in ceiling tiles and ventilation ducts common to air-conditioned buildings.' Construction analysts say products which use man-made mineral fibres account for 65 per cent to 70 per cent of the insulation market in Europe and that the figure is likely to be higher in north America. However, Mr Charles Rossiter, London University's emeritus professor of occupational health, said: 'I have serious reservations about the conclusions in the paper based on the information in the working draft.' All non-domestic insulation products which used man-made mineral fibres would contain some superfine man-made mineral fibres. The proportions could vary from as much as 40 per cent or 50 per cent to less than 1 per cent. Several large manufacturers of non-domestic insulation denied that their products use man-made mineral fibres and questioned the scientific basis of the study. Dr Hedge said man-made mineral fibres were unlikely to be the sole cause of the symptoms of the syndrome, which include eye, nose, throat and skin irritation, as well as coughing, sneezing and breathing difficulties. Dr Leslie Hawkins, director of the occupational health service at Surrey University's Robens Institute, said the study may have identified an important factor. But he stressed that identifying a single cause or cure for the syndrome was unlikely. Man-made mineral fibres are produced by spinning molten rock or glass into fine fibres which are then woven into thick insulating 'blankets'. These are used to line ceiling tiles and ventilation ducts. Dr Hedge says: 'Only when the fibres are mechanically disturbed is there a danger of fibres being released into the air. As the building starts to age, and work is done on the building, the problem begins.' He said the identification of insulation fibres as strongly linked to 'sick building syndrome' fitted the history of the syndrome which was first widely reported in the 1970s. He pointed to the introduction of computer terminals and changes in the design of air-conditioning which allowed minerals into ventilation systems. Computer operators report 'sick building syndrome' more often than other workers. That may be because terminals attract dust which settles on the faces of the operators.
19920922000000000	FT  22 SEP 92 / Warning over stress-related illness at work. MORE than 750,000 people took time off work in 1989-90 because of work-related illness, a conference was told yesterday. Dr Paul Oldershaw, head of technology and health sciences at the Health and Safety Executive, told the three-day conference in Sheffield on occupational health that work-related illness would be a big concern in the future. Stress at work was also recognised as an important cause of sickness absence, Dr Oldershaw said. Research had shown that occupational stress could have an impact on physical health. 'We need to gain a better understanding of the causes of psychological stress and how these impact on the health and performance of the worker.' Some 8,000 lives and 27m working days in Europe are lost each year due to work-related accidents and ill health. Dr Oldershaw called for more debate in the European Community to identify areas that could be treated and where further research was necessary. He said the largest single area of work-related health disorders was musculo-skeletal injury: 'It affects workers in heavy manual activities, such as lifting, as well as less strenuous but more repetitive tasks such as keyboard operators and supermarket check-out staff.' Almost 30 per cent of women workers do not know if their employer has an equal-opportunities policy, a survey of 20 organisations suggests. The survey, conducted by Riley Advertising, which specialises in recruitment advertising, found that all but one employer had such a policy. Researchers questioned both employers and 437 of their women workers. More than half of those women who are aware of their employers' equal-opportunities policies said they were only partly successful. More than 60 per cent said their employers were not committed to their policies. However, more than 80 per cent thought the policies were useful. The survey also found that fewer than 8 per cent of women workers said their employers had consulted them when drawing up equal-opportunities policies. Women and Work. Riley Advertising, Riley House, 4 Red Lion Court, London EC4. Pounds 35
19921005000000000	FT  05 OCT 92 / Survey of Technology in the Office (14): Work-related illnesses - Ergonomics. OFFICE staff have not traditionally expected to suffer serious, disabling injuries at work in the way that construction workers often have. Yet there is now overwhelming evidence that white-collar workers face dangers when they sit at their desks. These dangers can have serious implications for incautious employers who may face a flood of damages claims or productivity setbacks as a result of high levels of absence. A machine operator at Vauxhall Motors in Luton who contracted repetitive strain injury (RSI) and had to give up her job was awarded a record Pounds 59,617 in damages and loss of earnings by a judge at Luton County Court earlier this year. A recent case involving BT keyboard operators granted damages of Pounds 6,000 but a loss of earnings award has not yet been decided. In another case, GMB general union received Pounds 67,000 between them for loss of earnings. In 1989-90 more than 750,000 people took sickness absence because of work-related illness, and some 8,000 lives and 27m working days in Europe are lost each year due to work-related accidents and ill health, according to the Health and Safety Executive. The HSE believes the problem is growing. The visual display unit has invaded desk space and become virtually ubiquitous in offices in the developed world. However, the revolution in equipment was not matched with a revolution in working practices or office furniture and it is small wonder that office workers have found their new equipment created new problems. The most well known and the biggest of the new maladies is musculo-skeletal injury, in particular Repetitive Strain Injury (RSI), the painful, sometimes disabling disorder that affects necks, shoulders, arms and hands. In the US, RSI now accounts for more than half of all reported work-related injuries. In the UK, it is a growing problem among white-collar workers affecting professionals, secretarial staff, computer users and high-volume data handlers. RSI refers to a variety of complaints. Sufferers report symptoms ranging from mild discomfort to severe, disabling pain which affects their personal as well as their professional lives. Some disorders, such as tenosynovitis and capsulitis are well understood by the growing army of experts. Others are less easy to diagnose and tend to be lumped together under vague headings such as damaged nerve tissue. None is easy to cure. But RSI is avoidable and employers who have made concerted efforts to reorganise their office environments have seen dramatic decreases in its incidence. Employers who have ignored the risks to their staff will soon have an additional reason to keep those risks to a minimum. By the end of this year the UK must have domestic legislation which meets the requirements of a European Community directive. The legislation is highly specific. It refers to 'display screen equipment' but excludes computer systems open to the public and automatic teller machines in banks and building societies, as well as calculators, typewriters and lap-top users not typically used for long periods. The directive applies to the workstation as a whole, covering chairs, desks, modems and printers. These references and a catch-all heading of the 'immediate work environment' means employers will have to think carefully about the implications of all office environment. It is not just the physical pieces of equipment which employers must ensure comply with the directive; humidity, lighting, radiation and noise are all addressed. Employers will be obliged to conduct workplace evaluations to check they do not present health risks to their staff. The directive specifies that screen workers must be properly trained, allowed free eye testing and any necessary glasses and that screen work must be interspersed with periods of activity or breaks. RSI is not the only risk to white-collar workers. There is the potentially fatal building-related illness which covers legionnaires disease as well as other dangerous bacteria which lurk in convenient recesses provided by modern air conditioning systems and elsewhere. Then there is sick building syndrome, less dangerous but more difficult to tackle because it is hard to diagnose and no one really knows for sure what causes it. It can affect staff in ways which even they do not recognise immediately but which can have a serious affect on both their health and the health of their businesses. The World Health Organisation estimates the syndrome affects a third of European and North American offices. The House of Commons Environment Committee put the annual cost to the UK economy alone as between Pounds 330m and more than Pounds 650m a year in absenteeism. A wide variety of symptoms range from sore throats, dry eyes (some staff have been unable to wear contact lenses), headaches and coughs through exacerbated menstrual disorders to lethargy, dizziness and depression. Sufferers typically report that their symptoms only show up when they are at work and disappear as soon as they leave. Their close friends and families appear to be immune. The Health and Safety Executive takes a gloomy view. It recently concluded that 20 years of research had failed to uncover any definite cure or cause for the condition. The HSE is funding research at London University which is comparing the sickness and absence data of more than 10,000 office-based civil servants with measurements of environmental factors and building maintenance work. Evidence suggests that stress at work is also an important cause of sickness absence. The HSE believes occupational stress could have an impact on physical health.
19921125000000000	FT  25 NOV 92 / Management: Better safe than sorry when you go to work / A look at a series of new regulations that will soon be affecting UK employers. Employers will wake up to seven new sets of safety regulations on January 1 next year, governing a range of workplace issues from lifting loads to visual display units. Latest figures show that an average of nine workers are killed each week in Britain and there are about 1.4m work-related injuries every year, the Health and Safety Commission (HSC) announced at the launch of Workplace Health and Safety Week - the biggest ever drive to improve workplace safety in the UK which began on Monday. The regulations have been criticised by the GMB general union which yesterday said a leaked document showed the Health and Safety Executive had 'looked for ways to water down and block' UK obligations under European law which the regulations are designed to implement. The HSC estimates that industry may face costs of Pounds 300m in the first year of implementing the new laws, although it says that employers that already meet existing obligations should not find the regulations onerous. In all cases employers are required to reduce risks 'as far as is reasonably practicable', which means to the point where the cost of further measures would be disproportionate to benefits. Four sets of regulations have already been published for which Health and Safety Executive guidance is available: Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations. The main duties for employers are to assess the health and safety risks to employees and others who may be affected by their work and act on that assessment; appoint 'competent people' - employees or outsiders - to implement measures; set up emergency procedures; inform and train employees to avoid risks; monitor employees' health where necessary and consult employee representatives. Health and Safety (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations are the first for VDU screen work and affect all those who habitually use display screen equipment as a significant part of their normal work. Employers must assess the risks posed by workstations and reduce them; ensure that workstations comply with requirements for screens, keyboards, working environments, task design and software. New workstations will have to comply immediately; those operating before December 31 1992 have until 31 December 1996. For direct employees only, employers will have to plan periodic breaks from screen work, provide eye-tests, special glasses and provide adequate training. Those who use screens intermittently may not be covered at all. Manual Handling Operations Regulations will apply to all industries and services, replacing earlier legislation which applied only to some sectors. They abandon old weight limits and adopt broad guidelines and an ergonomic approach. The main duties on employers are to avoid the need for manual handling operations involving a risk of injury; make an assessment of the risk of injury from manual handling and reduce risks. An amendment to the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1988 emphasises the prevention of exposure to carcinogens at work by using alternative substances or processes and by means of enclosed systems of work. Three further sets of regulations are due later this month or early next. Exact provisions are not yet known, but the main obligations will reflect the requirements of their parent European directives. Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations. Employers in all industries will have to select equipment according to working conditions and hazards; ensure equipment is suitable, maintained and properly used; give adequate information and training. Personal Protective Equipment at Work. Employers will have to assess risks and ensure personal protective equipment is suitable according to requirements laid down. Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations govern a wide range of issues in permanent workplaces (not building sites) such as temperature, space and lighting; safety devices for doors, gates and escalators and requirements for the construction and maintenance of floors. The HSE has published a leaflet called New Health and Safety at Work Regulations available from its Freeleaflet line 0742 892346 or the HSE Information Centre, Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ.
19930420000000000	FT  20 APR 93 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (12): Ways to reduce RSI risks - . . . Keyboards. 'I DIDN'T admit that I had repetitive strain injury (RSI) until I dropped the kettle one morning,' says technology journalist and former RSI sufferer Dom Pancucci. 'Then I took the car out - and could not unclench my hand after driving. For six months after that I could not use my right arm at all.' RSI affects the hands and arms and can cause extreme pain and disablement. Pancucci contracted it after using an electric typewriter but it is increasingly being associated with computer keyboard use. Concern about RSI has led a number of suppliers to produce special ergonomically-designed keyboards, which look quite different from the standard QWERTY keyboard and put more emphasis on the user's comfort. They might just catch on. US-based Aetna Life and Casualty estimates that workers' compensation claims and other expenses related to RSI, may cost US business as much as Dollars 20bn a year. And in the UK, the National Union of Communications believes there may be 100,000 people suffering from various RSIs. Tim Gopsill, the National Union of Journalists' health and safety expert, says he knows of 1,000 cases among writers who use computers. The new keyboards attempt to minimise wrist movement when typing, reducing stress on the neck and shoulder muscles. For example, Apple Computer's new ergonomic keyboard (costing Pounds 195) for the Macintosh Computer includes small pads to rest the wrists on (see picture). ERGONOMIC MOUSE Apple also sells an ergonomically designed 'mouse' costing Pounds 40. The mouse does not need to be gripped tightly in the hand, but can be moved using the fingertips. And a large button on the top lets more than one finger do the clicking. A number of RSI cases have been linked to the use of a mouse, so the choice of ergonomically designed mice is growing. Pamela Schure, imaging product marketing manager at Apple UK, says the two products reflect a basic principle of ergonomic design in that they 'adjust to the worker, not the other way round.' In the US, new companies are springing up to take advantage of demand for more ergonomically designed keyboards. One of these is Kinesis of Bellevue, Washington. Its keyboard separates the keys used by right and left hands in to pockets at the back of the keyboard. The user must rest his/her wrists on the front of the keyboard to use them. The company says it designed its keyboard to take advantage of the neutral hand, wrist and shoulder postures of the body. However, innovation in the design of keyboards does not seem to be prompted simply by concern for the user. Suppliers are also anxious to protect themselves. In the US, many workers with RSI are suing keyboard and scanner manufacturers. The defendants include computer industry giants such as IBM, NCR and Compaq. Manufacturers are likely to challenge these lawsuits by claiming that their equipment wasn't used properly - that chairs weren't suitable or lighting was poor. Or that users were under too much pressure and not given enough breaks. They are also likely to blame the employers. KEY QUESTIONS Are the manufacturers simply shirking their responsibilities, or is their more to RSI than the keyboard itself? Jeffrey Boyling, a consultant ergonomist and qualified physiotherapist who advises the Financial Times, says RSI cannot be blamed on a particular design of keyboard - 'I've seen cases of RSI involving all manner of keyboards,' he says. There is no foolproof way of preventing RSI but the risks can definitely be minimised. A number of factors are common to most outbreaks: A physical/ergonomic deficiency in the workstation, or in the way the person works at it. For example, poor posture or a keyboard position which does not provide minimal flexing of the wrists. Added pyscho-social stress, such as a problem with the work itself, or between a group of workers and their boss. Other possible psycho-social risks factors include software which is difficult to use, or the threat of redundancy. Andrea Caws, a consultant ergonomist at London-based System Concepts, says because RSI tends to occur among clusters of workers (eg at the BBC in Caversham and among a group of BT workers), the problem can't be blamed on an individual being highly strung. She says some, but by no means all, companies are taking ergonomic issues seriously. However, under new Health & Safety regulations covering display screen use, employers can face legal penalties if they don't. Caws says under the new regulations employers must: Assess their workstations and the health and safety risks of workers using them. They must then take steps to reduce those risks. Adhere to at least the minimum ergonomic standards for screens (eg screens should be flicker free), keyboards, mice, desk, chairs and the physical environment, such as lighting. Plan display screen work to introduce variety and breaks. Pay for eye tests related to display screen work. Provide information and training on how to work safely at a computer. Applying ergonomic principles takes time and money, but the cost of dealing with an RSI outbreak is likely to be much higher, not just in terms of payouts to staff but also in management time. For example, the FT says it has spent over Pounds 1.4m tackling RSI. The costs to individuals suffering from RSI can also be high. Pancucci says: 'If you are getting pains in your hands and arms, get a medical opinion quickly from someone with RSI experience. I nearly left it too long.' The writer, Joia Shillingford, is editor of the Financial Times newsletter, 'Business Computing Brief.'
19930806000000000	FT  06 AUG 93 / Unions to set up RSI databank. UNIONS are to set up a central databank on legal action and settlement levels in repetitive strain injury cases, the Trades Union Congress announced yesterday at a conference with the Association of Personal Injury Lawyers. The TUC estimates that one in 10 workers could be affected by RSI. The term covers a range of conditions affecting the shoulder, arm and hand which have mainly been associated with manual jobs but are increasingly being experienced by white-collar workers, particularly users of visual display units.
19931008000000000	FT  08 OCT 93 / Management: Work without strain - Health Check / National Back Pain Week starts in Britain on Monday. FOR some people, every week is back pain week. Although estimates vary, back pain is responsible for more than 50m certified sick days a year in the UK, and a sizeable loss of output by anyone's reckoning. Since some 80 per cent of people in the west suffer back pain at some time, symptoms could be considered part of the human condition, but they are not unavoidable. Most of those afflicted have low back pain, because the greatest mechanical stress is at the base, but pain can occur anywhere in the spine and may radiate down a leg or arm. Symptoms usually resolve with a little rest along with painkillers and perhaps local heat to ease muscle spasm. The spine is a complex piece of machinery originally designed for creatures that walked on all fours. Tumours and other diseases do occur, but the most common cause of back pain is mechanical strain, which is where some problems could be avoided. Many accidents reported to the Health and Safety Executive arise from manual handling of loads, but pain results from repetitive trauma as well as one-off injuries. The HSE publishes guidelines on the weight of loads that should be carried. These are by no means absolute, for many factors - including workplace routine and individual fitness - affect the risk of injury. Under the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992, assessment of risk rests on the employer. Employees should also reduce the need for heavy or awkward handling in order to lessen the dangers. There are several obvious ways to do this, from making the load lighter to giving employees better training. Almost everyone knows what a good lifting technique is, but few people - even those with backache - put it into practice. Backache also comes to those who sit and work. Research shows that much more weight passes through the discs when sitting than when standing. Perhaps this is because the spine's gentle S-shape is lost when seated. On car journeys, it is worth stopping regularly to get out for a stretch, however tight the schedules. If buying a car, it is a good idea to choose a model in which the height as well as the angle of the seat can be adjusted. In the office, the height of chair and/or desk may need adjustment. Short breaks to stretch the back should be the order of the day. Particular problems can arise with VDUs, of which there are close to 10m in use in the UK. Mastering a PC should include attention to the physical aspects of sitting at a terminal for any length of time. Following EC directive 90/270, new legislation came into force in the UK on 1 January. It applies to those using VDUs for a significant part of the day, and obliges employers to evaluate possible risks (both physical and mental) to take steps to reduce risks, and to provide staff with information and training. Back problems are less likely if elbows are at right angles and the upper arm vertical when using the keyboard. Shorter people may benefit from footrests, and under the legislation anyone who asks must have one provided. Chairs should tilt slightly forward, and the computer screen positioned straight ahead in the line of vision, with the aid of monitor arms or telephone directories. Unfortunately this may increase glare - and eye symptoms - from the screen. It is also impossible to arrange with laptops. Again, breaks are needed before tiredness sets in - at least once an hour for a few minutes, or as long as it takes to remove one's eyes from the screen and do some stretching, at the desk if it is impractical to get up. The Organisation of Chartered Physiotherapists can give advice to businesses on the ergonomics of office work (Tel: 0702 77462). The HSE Information Centre is at Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ (Tel: 0742 892345; Fax: 0742 892333). Chiropractors in the UK are offering free back-pain screenings and posture checks next week (Call Freephone 0800 212618). The author is a London general practitioner.  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- WATCH YOUR BACK  -----------------------------------------------------------------------  -Keep your back straight and bend your knees when lifting. Hold the   load close to your body, or, better still, use a trolley.  -Adjust work surface heights so that you can work upright. If the   surface has to be low, don't bend. Use a stool, chair, or kneel.  -Don't slouch at work, at home, or in the car. Sit as upright as   possible and place a small cushion at lower back height.  -Try to keep your back's natural hollow when kneeling. Take some weight   through the arms and stretch gently from time to time.  -Sleep on a firm, comfortable mattress, on your back or side. Sleeping   on your front can put stress on the lower back and neck.  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- National Back Pain Association  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
19931029000000000	FT  29 OCT 93 / RSI ruling casts doubt on future claims for damages. THE FUTURE of legal actions claiming damages for repetitive strain injury (RSI) was thrown into uncertainty yesterday after a High Court judge ruled that the condition was meaningless as a medical concept. Judge John Prosser dismissed a claim by Mr Rafiq Mughal, a former journalist with the Reuters news agency, that his work conditions for using computer keyboards were responsible for injuries to his upper limbs. Although agreeing that Mr Rafiq suffered pain in his hands, arms and shoulders, the judge said its most likely cause was his emotional state. He lacked confidence in his work as a sub-editor, took sleeping tablets and felt he was being watched and even victimised by his colleagues. 'These factors more than anything lie at the root of his problem,' the judge said. His ruling goes against judgments in other recent RSI cases. In cases involving both British Telecom clerical staff and manual workers employed by Bernard Matthews, the turkey producers, the courts recognised RSI as a medical condition and awarded damages to those injured at work. Mr Mughal's case was the first in a series being brought by the National Union of Journalists. Yesterday, the union said it was disappointed at the outcome, but insisted it would continue with some 70 individual actions against newspaper employers. Several hundred RSI cases involving office workers who used computer keyboards, such as secretaries and solicitors, are also due to come to court. In his judgment, Judge Prosser said RSI could not be recognised as an authentic medical condition because, unlike tenosynovitis or tennis elbow, no specific symptoms could be ascribed to it. The term had no place in the medical text books and served only to confuse, he said. He said no pattern existed between Mr Mughal's physical symptoms and his working conditions and no causal relationship had been proved. Reuters welcomed the ruling and said it took 'the very greatest care' of its employees. Mr Mughal turned down the offer of a Pounds 20,000 payment to settle out of court. The NUJ was ordered to pay Reuters' costs which were described as 'substantial'. The union said later it was considering an appeal. Yesterday's judgment was criticised by some medical experts. Mr Peter Wells of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy, a specialist in upper limb disorders, said RSI was not in medical textbooks only because of its recent emergence as a problem. The courts and RSI, Page 11
19931104000000000	FT  04 NOV 93 / RSI regulations 'being ignored'. TWO-THIRDS of employers are not conforming with new European Community health and safety regulations on display screens, according to a survey by the MSF technical union. The union said that many people could be at risk from repetitive strain injury, stress and eyesight problems as a result. The poll of 240 union safety officers found that 50 per cent of employers had failed to carry out the legal requirement to assess risks to health associated with screens.
19940112000000000	FT  12 JAN 94 / Management: Piano gives a lesson for the workplace - Many people suffer aches and pains from using computer keyboards. A new book suggests tips based on a musician's experience. Barely a week goes by without news that some sporting personality has had to 'retire' or at least rest because of injury. Their high profile always guarantees a mention. But what of aches, pains and injuries sustained by people in the workplace and in particular those using computer keyboards? The problems of tenosynovitis, tendinitis and carpal tunnel syndrome rarely get any coverage unless a compensation payment has been involved. Can anything be done to prevent the daily difficulties experienced by countless individuals? The Hand Book, published this week* may provide some answers. The author is Stephanie Brown, a New York-based professor of piano who has noted the injuries suffered by pianists. Brown has identified a direct link between incorrect, strained finger and hand positions at the keyboard and subsequent injury. Pianists with correct natural positions and movements had a keyboard style characterised by fluidity and an absence of injury. The application to computer keyboards became evident when Brown was learning how to operate her own computer. Many of her teachers used the same harmful positions and movements she had observed in pianists. Studying typing manuals highlighted the need for a preventative keyboard method. Unfortunately, many computer users have never learnt to type, which may put them at even greater risk of experiencing aches and pains. 'It's well known that certain positions and motions can cause injury in practically every sport,' says Brown. 'Everyone has had the experience of watching someone swing a tennis racquet or golf club and think, 'Ouch]' It just looks wrong. Using a computer keyboard is no different. It's a vigorous micro-athletic workout for the hands and fingers. Do it wrong and you're asking for trouble.' The Hand Book aims to help computer users prevent injuries by avoiding dangerous hand positions. These have been variously called The Dangerous Angle, The Cobra, The Spider and The Flying Pinky. Instead, keyboard users can experience the comfortable and relaxed feel of the correct position by working through a series of 14 easy to follow lessons, predominantly aimed at the hands. Other parts of the body - which can be responsible for symptoms in the hands - are either omitted or mentioned only briefly. The book advises on how to care for the hands and details are given of various stretches like the Teepee, Curl, Press and Tuck to maintain mobility. Athletes warm up before playing and so should computer users, says Brown. Details of exercises and massage during rest breaks from the screen are given for those body parts that need to be moved. There is nothing controversial in this but there are some parts that have not been stretched but which should be stretched to prevent some of the symptoms reported by keyboard users Of course there is more to preventing hand injuries at the keyboard and this is acknowledged in the book. Unfortunately the section on workstation adjustment is too brief and could be confusing for some readers. It also assumes that most keyboard users can adjust the height of the keyboard whereas the majority of users sit at desks of fixed height. However, the visual reminder of the Do's and Don'ts ('The Golden Rules') offers a useful summary. Here are some of them: Keep the natural wrist line; Let the wrists float; Let the elbows hang free; Relax the ring and little fingers; Don't squeeze the mouse; Rest the hands when not keying. *The Hand Book (Preventing Computer Injury), pp98. Published by Ergonome Incorporated, 145 West 96th Street, Suite 800, New York, NY10025. Jeffrey Boyling is a London- based chartered physiotherapist and ergonomist.
19940225000000000	FT  25 FEB 94 / Technology (Worth Watching): ICL's new keyboard aims for comfort. An ergonomic keyboard designed to improve computer typing comfort has been introduced by ICL, the UK computer group owned by Japan's Fujitsu. It also reduces static electricity built up by clothing or low humidity. Costing Pounds 65, the ErgoPRO 102 keyboard minimises tension and load on fingers, hands and wrists. Its low front edge and wide range of tilting angles help users find the best typing posture. The keys are activated by a light typing pressure and are comfortable and quiet for fast typing. An extended spacebar means users need not twist or change wrist position. Telephone Technology (ICL distributor): UK, 071 454 9360
19940818000000000	FT  18 AUG 94 / Two computer makers to put health warning on keyboards. Compaq Computer and Microsoft, two of the largest companies in the personal computer industry, are taking the unprecedented step of placing warning labels on computer keyboards urging users to take care to avoid possible injuries from their use. Responding to widespread concerns about the possibility of repetitive strain injury (RSI) from computer use, Compaq will put stickers on its PC keyboards reading: 'Warning] To reduce risk of serious injury to hands, wrists or other joints read Safety & Comfort Guide.' Booklets offering advice on computer use will be included with new computers and keyboards. The advice will include suggestions on positioning of office equipment and furniture, posture, lighting, vision care and work habits. Most computer makers, including Compaq, are defending themselves against thousands of lawsuits filed by people who have suffered injuries which they believe have been caused by keyboard use. A central issue in many of these suits is whether manufacturers knew there were risks, but failed to give users adequate warning. Compaq said it was not admitting any liability for injuries. 'Even though no scientific studies have shown that typing at a computer keyboard causes these injuries, we believe that suggestions on proper computer set-up and work habits are useful in promoting general workplace comfort and health,' it said. Microsoft is about to launch an ergonomically-designed keyboard with an angled surface, slanted keys and a wrist rest. It will put a warning on this product, the company said. The companies are the first in the computer industry to warn that there is a chance of serious injury from the prolonged use of keyboards. Other computer companies may follow suit. However, IBM said yesterday it had no such plans. There have been widespread reports in the US and Europe of RSI linked to computer use. The afflictions range from muscular pain in the hands, wrists and shoulders to serious nerve damage. In the US, RSI is the leading form of job-related injury, with estimates of the number of workers affected ranging as high as 5m. The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has estimated that such injuries cost about Dollars 27bn (Pounds 17.4bn) per year in medical costs and lost income. In the UK, there were 200,000 reported cases of job-related 'upper limb injuries' last year, according to the Trades Union Congress.
19940906000000000	FT  06 SEP 94 / Business and the Law: Warning note is sounded - The implications of labels on computer keyboards. The recent decision by Compaq Computer of the US to put a health warning on the keyboards of its personal computer products is expected to have a significant impact on computer-related personal injury litigation worldwide. Compaq's label draws users' attention to the risks of repetitive strain injury (RSI) - an umbrella term for disorders with symptoms including swelling and chronic pain in the hands, arms and shoulders. In the US, more than 2,000 law suits have been filed against computer manufacturers by individuals who claim to have been injured through using keyboards. The UK and Australian courts are also handling numerous injury claims. Unlike in the US, where employers are largely protected from liability for workplace injuries by workers' compensation insurance, employers are the primary target of litigation in countries such as the UK. US lawyers say that Compaq, the world's largest personal computer manufacturer, has started using the warning label to limit its liability to future claims. However, Compaq's action may increase the vulnerability of other computer makers, as well as employers, to injury claims. The US version of Compaq's keyboard label reads: 'WARNING] To reduce risk of serious injury to hands, wrists and other joints read the Safety & Comfort Guide.' The guide reinforces the message in even stronger terms: 'There may be a risk of serious injuries from working at your computer workstation' (Compaq's emphasis). It then gives guidelines on minimising the risk. The warning 'represents an acknowledgment that there is an association between keyboard use and injury', says Mr Arnold Lakind, a partner in the New Jersey firm of Szaferman, Lakind, Blumstein, Watter and Blader, which is representing about 200 plaintiffs in RSI complaints against computer companies in the US. Lawyers acting for people bringing RSI cases against employers in UK courts also regard Compaq's statement as significant. They say it is the first explicit admission by a manufacturer that the use of keyboards can be dangerous. According to Mr Lakind, Compaq's move is wise. The label 'will help Compaq immensely because, to the extent that somebody uses the keyboard after the warning, they may be assuming the risk of further injury. It is a very positive move by Compaq.' He points out, however, that Compaq's action may have repercussions for other manufacturers. 'In several respects, Compaq's warning labels increase the liability of other manufacturers that do not put labels on their products.' Compaq has demonstrated that there is an effective way to alert users to the risks of keyboard use, says Mr Lakind. 'Other companies now have a greater likelihood of being sued, because Compaq has shown that it is feasible to warn users while other companies have declined to do so.' Similarly, UK lawyers acting for insurers or employees say warning labels will undermine the argument that employers are unaware of the dangers of keyboard use, making it more difficult to defend against injury claims. Mr David Scrutton of Kennedys, a law firm that often acts for insurance companies, says that employers will be under increased pressure to abide by the European health and safety directive which compels them to take a number of precautions to avoid injuries to staff. 'Just plonking a computer on a desk and relying on the manufacturer's warning will not be sufficient to satisfy these regulations,' he says. Claims by medical experts that there is no link between RSI and keyboards - a feature in some cases currently before the courts - will now scarcely be tenable, says Mr Peter Woods of London law firm Stephens Innocent. Mr Tom Jones of Thompsons, an-other London firm, believes warning labels on PCs will shift the direction of court cases. Rather than arguing about the link between keyboards and RSI, they are likely to concentrate more on the efforts undertaken by employers to protect their staff - a move that could make litigation even more complex. In what appears to have been a last-minute change prompted by legal concerns, Compaq has said that the warning label on PCs sold in the UK and Australia will be toned down. It will read: 'IMPORTANT NOTICE: For comfortable and safe use please read the Safety and Comfort Guide.' The purpose of this label and of the US one is the same, according to Compaq  -to draw users' attention to the guide book, which will be the same throughout the world. The different wording is a 'cultural' issue, the company says. The variation, however, also reflects the different legal climates. In the UK and Australia, where employers have been sued, computer manufacturers must balance concerns about liability with the interests of corporate customers. In the US, it is computer manufacturers which are being accused of failing to warn customers about the alleged risks of injury. These cases will revolve around the question of 'what the computer companies knew and when they knew it', says Mr Lakind. To date, no damages have been awarded in these product liability suits, although there are rumours of out-of-court settlements. Because there is no definitive scientific evidence linking keyboards to injuries, other computer manufacturers have so far been reluctant to issue warnings. 'A warning suggests that there is a problem with the product,' says one official at IBM, the computer giant. IBM maintains that it is the way that some people use the products, rather than an inherent feature of keyboards, that can cause injuries. The company has no plans to put a warning label on its keyboards. However, Microsoft, the leading supplier of software for PCs, which is soon to introduce its first keyboard, will put a warning label on the product, a company official says. And members of the Center for Office Technology, a US PC industry group that has focused on RSI problems, plan to meet this month to reconsider the labelling issue. The outcome of an RSI claim against IBM, due to go to trial in Rhode Island next month, may determine whether warning labels become a standard feature of PCs. If they do, and the link between RSI and keyboards becomes more explicitly acknowledged, it will be increasingly incumbent on employers worldwide to provide safeguards against keyboard-related injuries. Additional reporting by John Mason
19940907000000000	FT  07 SEP 94 / International Company News: 'Natural' keyboard from Microsoft. Microsoft, the world's largest publisher of personal computer software, has launched an ergonomically designed 'natural' PC keyboard to help users avoid the dangers of repetitive stress injuries. Microsoft makes no claims that the keyboard will cure or prevent any form of RSI. Labels, affixed to the cable linking the keyboard to a PC and to the bottom of the keyboard, warn users that 'Continuous use of a keyboard may cause Repetitive Stress Injuries or related injuries'. Similar warning labels were recently introduced by Compaq, the world's largest PC manufacturer. The labels are seen as a move by the companies to avoid liability for future injury claims. Already, over 2,000 injury lawsuits have been filed against computer manufacturers in the US. The new Microsoft keyboard, which will be available worldwide next month at a price of around Dollars 100, is designed to allow users to maintain a more relaxed, natural position while typing. It can be plugged into any PC that runs Windows 3.1 or more recent versions of the Microsoft software. The keyboard is designed to encourage users to maintain a straighter wrist position - avoiding one of the most common causes of discomfort and injuries. Microsoft will also provide an 'ergonomics guide'. 'In the last 10 years, computers have dramatically changed the workplace and the ways in which people perform their jobs,' said Rick Thompson, manager of the hardware business unit at Microsoft. 'Yet in that time, the design of the computer keyboard has remained virtually unchanged.'
19941026000000000	FT  26 OCT 94 / Survey of Technology in the Office (21): Systems are under scrutiny / a look at the health risks in using office equipment. The mouse, a harmless looking device used by millions of people to control their computer software, is the latest piece of electronic equipment to come under scrutiny for health and safety reasons. It is the subject an international standard covering health and safety for high-tech offices being drawn up by national standards bodies worldwide, and it will correlate with EU requirements. Recent studies have shown that using a mouse can cause injuries, says Bjorn Malmberg, technical co-ordinator at ICL Personal Systems. Most people place the mouse to one side of the computer, where they have to extend their arm to use it. The slight clicking action works muscles further up the arm, even though most people are not aware of it. The further one has to stretch to hold the mouse, the more strain is put on those muscles. 'Some applications require you to use the mouse a lot, and you can get inflamed muscles' said Mr Malmberg. He recommends placing the mouse as close in to the shoulder as possible to avoid the condition, which is known as tennis elbow. Another condition caused by the use of a mouse is carpal tunnel syndrome. The symptoms are tingling feelings and pain in the thumb, index and middle fingers and a weakening of the thumb. Carpal tunnel syndrome can happen to mouse users if they rest their wrist on the desk while holding the mouse for extended periods. This position pushes the wrist joint back at an angle, causing pressure on the nerves which transmit signals between the hand and the brain. Some mouse products have been designed to allow the hand to rest in a more natural position. The Dexxa mouse from Logitec, for example, is designed to raise the wrist position. It costs about Pounds 15. The Microsoft Ergonomic mouse costs Pounds 39. Mouse mats with a raised surface at one end are also available, for about Pounds 10. Similarly, new-style computer keyboards, designed for comfort, are coming on to the market. Injuries caused by extended use of computer keyboards include carpal tunnel syndrome and repetitive strain injuries. Mostly they occur where the user performs repetitive tasks in a position which cramp the hands, wrists or shoulders. This may be due to poorly designed equipment or to poor posture, or both. Software company Microsoft has just launched its Natural Keyboard. Shaped like a wave with the two halves of the Querty keys sloping away from one another at a 40 degree angle, it also has a sloping piece of plain plastic along the front, intended as a palm rest and a pop-up stand underneath to act as a wrist-rest. Initially, the keyboard feels strange. But Microsoft claims that the slope puts the shoulders in a more relaxed position does than the conventional keyboard. The shoulders are opened out, instead of being hunched up. The pop-up wrist-rest - Microsoft calls it a wrist leveller - forces the wrist in a slightly downwards-sloping position for those who like to rest their wrists while typing. A rival product from US manufacturer Key Tronic uses a system of mechanical levers underneath the individual keys to create a softer landing for the fingers. Hard contact switches used to work the keys create a mechanical resistance to the finger on conventional keyboards, which also make the finger press directly down on the key - an unnatural movement. The Key Tronic Pro Touch keyboard allows the fingers to arch over the keyboard in a naturally comfortable position. ICL's ergonomically designed keyboard helps minimise the strain on muscles in the hands and forearms with a curved, sloping surface. It also incorporates an anti-static device in the space bar - computers generate a lot of static, which attracts dust and can result in headaches and tiredness. People who type on the keyboard while talking on the telephone are running an additional risk. This issue has received little attention so far, but it is known that holding the phone between the head and neck affects the balance of the vertebrae in the neck, causing a condition called Torticollis. Wearing a headset with a telephone microphone, could be the solution because it lets the user have both hands free. According to Stephen Murphy, of headset manufacturer Plantronics, headsets are governed by strict regulations on sound quality. But headsets can be expensive, with starting prices at Pounds 150 from either Plantronics or rival manufacturer Racal Acoustics. However, all manufacturers point out that improved equipment alone will not prevent any of the debilitating medical conditions. 'Our keyboard does not prevent repetitive strain injury. Just as you don't lose weight by drinking diet Coke,' said Richard Teversham, hardware product manager at Microsoft. Mr Teversham believes that telling people how to organise the overall work environment, will help them to help themselves. For example, a desktop computer should be placed at an appropriate height for the user. A footrest - costing between Pounds 15 and Pounds 40 - reduces the strain on legs and feet. A chair with built-in lumbar support - costing between Pounds 100 and Pounds 150 - supports the back. Lighting should not cause glare or reflections on the screen. And users need to be educated to take breaks from keyboard or mouse work and to maintain a good posture. Alan Cuthbertson, an independent consultant, pointed out that all employers in the European Union have a legal responsibility to educate their employees about high-tech health and safety. This follows the European directive 90/270 which was passed in 1992. Member states were required to introduce legislation by January 1993, and organisations have been given until 1996 to bring their offices in line.
