10000000000000000	mercy killing Under conditions have mercy killings taken place  methods were used  and were the principals involved.
19890208000000000	MANSLAUGHTER VERDICT GIVEN IN BABY'S DEATH. An Orange County Superior Court judge found Gregory Trent Wall guilty of involuntary manslaughter Tuesday for his part in the death of a 13-month-old baby. Declaring that the 31-year-old defendant had shown remorse, Judge Leonard H. McBride said he did not believe that Wall showed a total disregard for human life and that, therefore, Wall was not guilty of second degree murder, the original charge against him. Wall had pleaded not guilty in the case and was tried before the judge. As McBride announced his decision, Wall sat crying, holding his left hand over his eyes. Wall, who had been free on bail, was not taken into custody. He is to return March 31 for sentencing. He could face up to 4 years in prison. Wall was arrested in September, 1987, after the death of Shantana Speake, who was the daughter of Annette Chrisinger, his girlfriend at the time. According to Deputy Dist. Atty. Melvin L. Jensen, Chrisinger had left her baby in Wall's care at her home in Brea when she went to work Sept. 9. Jensen said Wall's version of what happened that day was that he put Shantana in her crib in an upstairs bedroom sometime after 5 p.m., then began vacuuming downstairs; he heard the baby scream, and ran and found her at the bottom of the stairs; he then put the baby back in her crib and telephoned Chrisinger's brother, then Chrisinger, to tell them what had happened but saying that the baby appeared to be fine. When Chrisinger came home, Jensen said, she questioned Wall, who told her that the baby had vomited after falling. Chrisinger went to check the baby and noticed that the she was having difficulty breathing, Jensen said. She immediately took the child to a hospital, but the child was declared brain dead soon after her arrival. She was removed from life support equipment the next day and died. Doctors and nurses at the hospital had noticed bruises on the baby's head and notified police of possible child abuse, and Wall was arrested, Jensen said.  Slapping Admitted During questioning by police, Wall admitted that he had slapped Shantana after the fall because she seemed hysterical. During the weeklong trial, Jensen argued that Wall lied when he said the child had fallen down the stairs. Jensen pointed out that the steps were covered with padding and carpeting and therefore Shantana could not have sustained the injuries that she had in a fall. "I think he beat the child up at the crib," Jensen said. "She didn't fall down the stairs. . . . It appears the child didn't like him, was jealous of him. She had been crying and he had a tough time handling it." McBride noted in his decision that he was not convinced that Shantana had fallen down the stairs. Outside the Santa Ana courtroom, Wall's attorney, Deputy Public Defender Tim B. Severin, said he was satisfied with the judge's decision to find Wall guilty of a lesser charge. He said he believes Wall's version of the story, that the girl fell down the stairs, was slapped and went into a coma.  Testimony From Wife Severin said that Wall, who came to Orange County from the Sacramento area, has no previous criminal record. He also said that Wall's wife, from whom he has been separated since 1986, testified that he never abused their own two children. Chrisinger, who was not in the courtroom Tuesday, said in a phone interview that she felt justice was not done, that Wall should have been convicted of second degree murder. "All I know is that my little girl lies in the ground," Chrisinger said. "I think they should do more about this. It's not necessary to hit babies. There is always some easier way to take care of the situation -- putting them in a playpen or just stepping away to calm down."
19890330000000000	NATION; MOTHER OF MAN IN COMA FOUR YEARS PULLS PLUG OVER PROTEST OF ATTACKER. The mother of a stabbing victim removed her son's life-support system at 12:01 a.m. today over the objections of the assailant, who fears that he will be charged with murder. Sylvia Lane withdrew her son Mark Weaver's feeding tube at the earliest time that it was legal to do so and before leaving for her job on the early morning shift at a nursing home. A probate judge on Feb. 27 gave her permission beginning today. The feeding tube has kept her son alive nearly four years. Lane said doctors believe that Weaver, 26, will die in a week or two. Only then will prosecutors say whether they will file a murder charge against Noel Pagan, who served three years in prison for aggravated assault on Weaver. A judge this week refused to allow Pagan to intervene in the case. Doctors said Weaver has no prospect of recovery from a "persistent vegetative state" caused by stab wounds to the neck that deprived his brain of oxygen.
19890407000000000	NATION; KNIFE VICTIM, OFF LIFE SUPPORT, DIES. A 26-year-old stabbing victim whose life-support system was disconnected eight days ago over the objections of his assailant died today nearly four years after the attack that left him in a coma. Sylvia Lane said her son, Mark Weaver, died at about 2 a.m. "He died peacefully. He never had a moment's pain," she said. An autopsy was being performed today at the request of the state attorney general's office. Weaver's feeding tube was removed last week after a probate judge ruled that Weaver's assailant, Noel Pagan, could not intervene. Pagan, who has served three years in prison for aggravated assault in the 1985 attack, feared he would be charged with murder if Weaver died. State prosecutors have declined to say whether they will bring a new charge against Pagan.
19890409000000000	THE WORLD. Three nurses in one of Vienna's oldest hospitals have been arrested on suspicion of killing up to 35 patients with drug overdoses, Austrian authorities said. The newspaper Die Presse said it was "the biggest mass killing in Austria's criminal history." Vienna Police Chief Guenther Boegl said the three female nurses, ranging in age from 26 to 30, worked in the Lainz Hospital on the city's western outskirts and have admitted killing a number of patients with lethal injections that included insulin, normally used to treat diabetes. "It appears they acted out of a misguided sense of mercy, but we are also investigating other motives," Boegl said. "Not all the patients were terminally ill."
19890427000000000	WEEPING FATHER PULLS GUN, STOPS INFANT'S LIFE SUPPORT. Rudolfo and Tamara Linares visited their comatose son in the hospital for the last time Wednesday morning. After spending a few minutes with the infant, Tamara left the room. That is when, police say, Rudolfo drew a .357-caliber handgun, which he pointed at the lone nurse in the room. He then disconnected the respirator that had kept 15-month-old Samuel alive for the past eight months. Weeping, Rudolfo Linares cradled the baby in his arms for 40 minutes until the boy died. Linares, a 23-year-old painter who lives in the suburb of Cicero, was charged with first-degree murder in the incident, which happened at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in the early hours of Wednesday morning. At a Wednesday evening court hearing, Linares was released on a $75,000 recognizance bond, which means that he does not have to post any bond money unless he fails to appear at future hearings. Assistant State's Atty. James Piper, in arguing that Linares be held in jail, told Judge Marvin Ruttenberg that the weapon was cocked and that Linares had threatened to "kill anybody who interfered." Ruttenberg told Linares to appear in court again today. Tamara Linares was not charged in the death. "She was never really considered a suspect," said Lisa Howard, a spokeswoman for the Cook County state's attorney's office. "This is the best thing," Tamara Linares told radio station WBBM-AM on Wednesday. "My baby is out of his misery. He's in heaven now." The child had been hospitalized since Aug. 2, when he swallowed a balloon and it blocked his trachea. The obstruction caused a lack of oxygen to his brain. "Basically, he's been comatose" and surviving only on a respirator since then, a Police Department spokesman said. The Linareses were told Tuesday that Samuel would be moved to a long-term care unit, said Carolyn Reed, the hospital's director of public relations. "His condition has been stable for some time. He hasn't been critical in the sense that his signs have been going up or down . . . . They expected this child to die at any time." Except for pointing the gun at the nurse, authorities said, Linares never seemed a threat to anyone during the incident. The nurse called security, which in turn called the Chicago police. Linares kept nurses, doctors and the police at bay by pointing the gun at the baby. "I'm not here to hurt anyone. I'll only hurt you if you try to plug my baby back in," police Sgt. William Rooney quoted Linares as saying. After a time, police say, Linares felt for a heartbeat. When he found none, he asked a doctor for a stethoscope. A doctor slid the stethoscope across the floor to him. When he determined that the baby was dead, Linares "broke down crying, turned the weapon over to the police and surrendered," said a Police Department spokesman, who asked not to be identified. Reed said Linares first tried to disconnect Samuel's life-support system last December or January. "He disconnected it," Reed said. "People were able to subdue him. The child was examined. There was no change. We did our own investigation and it was determined that the child was OK." After that incident, the pediatric intensive-care unit considered restricting Linares' access to his son but decided to simply have a nurse present when he visited. Rooney said Linares has two other children, both under 5. The Linareses live on a narrow street of modest bungalows in the heart of Cicero, a working-class Chicago suburb. Luciano Reyes, their landlord, who lives in the apartment below them, said he was stunned by the news.  'He Seemed Cheerful' "He was a very quiet, respectful guy," said Berniece Kielb, who lived two doors from the Linareses. "He said good morning. He seemed cheerful, smiling. He wasn't depressed and walking like he had the world on his shoulders." She said he spent all of Tuesday afternoon working on his car. The two had joked together. "I think what he did was an act of kindness and compassion," Kielb said. "I feel like he loved that boy . . . . He must've been in such a state that he said: 'This is enough.' " The neighbors all knew about the accident that had befallen little Samuel. Occasionally, they would ask Linares or his wife for the latest news. "He never wanted to actually talk about it," said Frank Glab, another neighbor. "He'd say: 'They say he's getting better, but I don't know.' I knew his heart was bleeding because he couldn't bring him home." Reyes said he did not know much about the family. Tamara Linares told him that her husband was originally from Texas but had lived many years in Chicago. Kielb said she believed that it was wrong for Linares to be charged with murder. "I feel he's given himself his own conviction," she said. "He's got to live with this for the rest of his life."
19890512000000000	GIRL DECLARED BRAIN DEAD HAS PREMATURE BABY BY CESAREAN. A brain-dead teen-ager sustained by life-support systems since March because of a thorny legal dispute over the fetus she was carrying delivered the baby by Cesarean section Thursday. Tanya Marie Rivera, 15, and her daughter were in very critical condition after the procedure, officials at San Bernardino County Medical Center said. Meanwhile, Tanya's parents, George and Alice Rivera of San Bernardino, were wrestling late Thursday with whether to remove their daughter from the machines that have kept her alive since she was shot in the head and declared brain dead nearly two months ago. "They've been here all night," said nursing supervisor Joy Flint. "They go from the girl's side to the baby and back again. They're trying to decide what to do." Hospital officials have said there is no hope for Tanya. The prognosis for her newborn, who is having trouble breathing because of poorly formed lungs, is poor, Flint said. Tanya, an attractive girl with shoulder-length brown hair, has been hooked to artificial support systems since she was shot once in the head March 15, allegedly by her boyfriend. The 16-year-old youth, who is the father of the baby and has not been identified, has been ordered to stand trial in Los Angeles in an unrelated homicide. He has not been charged in Tanya's case. The Riveras, who are divorced, initially had requested that their comatose daughter be allowed to die. Hospital officials refused, and the medical center's director won a court-ordered guardianship of Tanya over her parents' objections. In court filings, San Bernardino County officials sought to block termination of life sustaining care for the girl, citing rights of her fetus. They argued in court documents that termination of care for Tanya "would be tantamount to aborting the fetus." The county attorneys argued that Tanya's wishes were unknown, the fetus had a heartbeat and the law governing such cases is unclear. Hospital officials said they were reluctant to disconnect life-support systems because they were unsure of their legal liability. Before long, the case attracted the interest of abortion foes. Protests came from the Right to Life League of Southern California as well as a statewide organization of physicians opposing abortion, who wrote a letter critical of the Riveras and urged the court to appoint a guardian for Tanya. The Roman Catholic Diocese of San Bernardino County also stepped in, advocating that the fetus be saved and threatening to intervene legally in the dispute.  Began Contractions A San Bernardino Superior Court judge was scheduled to hear arguments in the case Monday. But on Wednesday morning, Tanya began experiencing uterine contractions. Medication stopped the contractions temporarily, but they resumed late Wednesday night. By morning, the fetus was showing signs of distress and the decision to perform a Cesarean section was made, said Charles Jervis, director of the medical center. Tanya was taken to the operating room at 10 a.m. and the baby was delivered 25 minutes later. The infant, who weighed about five pounds and was seven weeks premature, is in the neonatal intensive care unit. She suffers from hyaline membrane disease, a deficiency of the chemical that normally coats the sacks in the infant's lungs, and appears to have brain damage likely related to bleeding or infection during gestation. Although unusual, the San Bernardino case is not the first of its kind. In July, 1986, a baby was delivered in Santa Clara by doctors who had sustained the brain-dead mother for nearly eight weeks in order to allow the fetus to develop. The parents of the mother, Marie Odette Henderson, had wanted to terminate artificial support, but the father went to court and won an order protecting the fetus. He was later granted custody of the infant. In a related court case in February, New York state's highest court denied an appeal by anti-abortion activists seeking to prevent a Long Island man from having an abortion performed on his comatose wife.
19890513000000000	BRAIN-DEAD GIRL, 15, TAKEN OFF LIFE-SUPPORT AFTER GIVING BIRTH. A brain-dead teen-ager was removed from life-support equipment Friday, two days after giving birth to a premature daughter. Tanya Marie Rivera, 15, had been kept on life-support systems after county officials rejected the initial pleas of her parents not to do so. She died at 12:58 p.m. at San Bernardino County Medical Center, while her 2-day-old daughter remained in very critical condition with lung problems, according to a hospital statement. "The parents of Tanya Rivera met with administrators and physicians responsible for her care and it was jointly decided that continuing to keep Tanya on life-support would serve no purpose," the statement said. The teen-ager was declared brain dead March 15 after she suffered a gunshot wound to the head, which police say was inflicted by her 16-year-old boyfriend, a reputed gang member who is believed to be the newborn's father. No charges have been filed against the boy, who is in jail in Los Angeles on an unrelated murder charge.
19890521000000000	THE NATION. The Cook County, Ill., medical examiner has ruled that a 15-month-old boy unhooked by his father from a respirator died of accidental causes. Dr. Robert J. Stein made the ruling the day after a grand jury in Chicago refused to indict Rudolfo Linares, 23, who removed his son's life-support and held off hospital staff with a gun April 26. Samuel Linares had been comatose since accidentally swallowing a balloon last August. Officials at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center had refused the family's request to withdraw life-support. Stein said he reviewed the grand jury's decision before changing the death certificate from undetermined to accidental.
19890911000000000	WORLD; 'ANGEL OF DEATH' NURSE GETS 11 YEARS. A West German nurse dubbed "the angel of death" was sentenced to 11 years in prison today for killing patients with lethal injections to end their suffering. Michaela Roeder, 31, was found guilty of six counts of manslaughter and one each of attempted manslaughter and mercy killing. The prosecution had demanded a life sentence and the court's decision that compassion was Roeder's motive angered some members of the public in the courtroom. Unsuspecting colleagues called Roeder "the angel of death" because of the number of people who died while she was on duty.
19900109000000000	MORPHINE CAN KILL ONLY PART OF THE PAIN; DEATH: WE FOCUS ON PHYSICAL PAIN, BUT EMOTIONAL PAIN USUALLY IS MORE DIFFICULT TO TREAT.. The fatal shooting of Steven Charles Jenkins, a terminally ill AIDS patient, by his friend Philip Lee Saylor on Jan. 2 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center has again focused attention on the problems of death and dying in our society. The attending physician in the case, Dr. Phillip C. Zakowski, expressed his regrets about the apparent mercy killing, saying that although he understood the emotional difficulties of the situation, "allowing us to use morphine (anesthesia) would have been a much more humane way . . . . That is a very comfortable, painless way to let nature take its course." Unfortunately, there is no painless way to die. By focusing on the physical pain, we lose sight of the emotional pain facing patients and their families. The latter is usually more difficult to "treat." The dying patient must struggle with loss of physical function, increasing dependence on others, constant threats to dignity brought about by the illness and the growing awareness that he or she will be separated from loved ones. Loved ones suffer as they watch the patient endure this. They grieve for his or her losses as well as their own. In addition, they must deal with their guilt over past conflicts with the patient, feelings of inadequacy from their inability to help and questions of their own mortality. Obviously, intravenous morphine will provide little relief for these things. Yet there is much that can be done, starting with communication. Patients must try to express their wants, needs and fears. Physicians must facilitate this by being willing to listen to patients. They also must explore these issues directly. Family members must be involved from the start to help provide support for the patient and to deal with their own emotional needs. Through this, realistic goals can be established and a treatment plan formulated according to the patient's wishes. Through communication, understanding and support, desperate acts by patients and family members can be avoided. Finally, we must all acknowledge that in many situations, a "painless" death is a myth. There are times when physical and emotional pain persist, despite all efforts. Some patients say that the only time they are without pain is when they are receiving so much medication that they are unconscious. Others, although not in pain, are so debilitated by their condition that they find that the burdens of life surpass any joy that they might feel. Whether this constitutes an acceptable existence is something that only the patient can decide. We must not delude ourselves into believing that we can eliminate this type of suffering. We must acknowledge our limitations so that our society can move forward and explore more humane options for dealing with the terminally ill, such as euthanasia. Unless we provide patients and their families with some way of relieving their anguish, they will continue to use whatever means they feel are available to them.
19900110000000000	DIANNE KLEIN: WE ALL DIE A BIT DAILY, BUT COUNSELOR EASES FINAL STEPS. The hopeless seek out Caroline Youngquist. They call and they stop by: AIDS patients, the disabled, the old and ailing. She can offer them no miracle medicines or cures of faith. Nor does she want to. For these people, Youngquist believes, it is time to die. So she endeavors to help them do so. With dignity. "It takes a hell of a lot of courage to take your own life," Youngquist says, staring me straight in the eye. "I hope that when my time comes, I'll have the courage to take my own." Caroline Youngquist, 79, full of fire and warmth, is Orange County's volunteer representative for the Hemlock Society, a right-to-die organization that hopes one day to legalize doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill. Although she stresses that she has not directly assisted in anyone's death, a felony under California law, Youngquist refers people to literature that outlines, in precise detail, how they may painlessly take their own lives. She believes that many have. "So many people come here," she says with a wave of her arm toward the living room of her Leisure World townhouse. "These people are usually perfect strangers, from around here, Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, Corona. We talk, and then, I forget about them. It's better that way. We protect ourselves." Sometimes, she says, it is the ill who ask for her help; other times, those who cannot stand to see them suffer. "I do have people who come back and call," she says. "They are very grateful." The truth is that I was rather astounded by what Youngquist told me when I visited her the other day. This strong woman with the oversize glasses and the fringe of white hair gave me unadorned talk about euthanasia: what some call murder, others compassion. I had expected polemics, perhaps some stridency. But to Youngquist, the issue is starkly simple and supremely private. She and others have the right to die quickly and without pain. They will do so. To that end, Youngquist distributes durable power of attorney forms, a legal document that allows patients to direct their own medical care, and copies of "Let Me Die Before I Wake," a guide to "self-deliverance" written by Hemlock Society founder Derek Humphry. "Oh, there is a very good way of taking your own life," Youngquist tells me while leafing through the Hemlock Society newsletters and right-to-die books that she has stacked on the dining room table. "And here it is." With that she hands me a drug dosage table, published by the Hemlock Society with the printed admonishment to "keep this document in a secure, private place," and then asks me to please keep this information to myself. "I feel very sorry for them," she says of those who come to share their pain. "I've suffered myself. That's why I can help." Youngquist acknowledges that hers is a position many do not share. Some object to the idea of a physician taking a life, others call suicide a sin and still others worry that the old and disabled could feel pressured to die. "I certainly feel no pressure whatsoever," Youngquist says. "If I find out I have cancer, for example, I don't want to go through the chemotherapy, the hospitals, all that, not at my age. "A lot of people do go through with it (treatment). They live six months, or five years, more. I don't want to do that. It's time to call it a life. "This is not a sin. It's more of a sin for the hospital and doctors to keep people alive artificially. In the good old days, my mother, my grandmother, they got sick and they died. Today they keep people alive artificially. Every day, there are people who are begging to die. . . . "Everybody here in Leisure World should be a member (of the Hemlock Society), for heaven's sake." As it is, Youngquist says 6,500 Leisure World residents signed a petition to place an initiative on the ballot in 1988 that would legalize doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill. She says that number would surely have been higher if organizers had had the money to hire professional signature gatherers. Statewide, the initiative failed to qualify after proponents collected fewer than than half the required signatures. A coalition has formed to place the renamed Death with Dignity Act on the ballot in 1992. So until then, Youngquist says, she will try to stay off the soapbox. The Hemlock Society has no formal meetings in Orange County -- "we have enough organizations in Leisure World" -- and besides, she's busy enough with everything else. She is an accomplished, self-taught sculptor. She has friends and male companions -- "I think it's foolish for someone my age to get married again" -- and a home that stands as a testament to her vitality. In March, she installed a parquet floor in her entryway -- "The trouble with you young people is you don't know the joy of doing things for yourself" -- and after that, she knocked out a wall in the upstairs bedroom to let in more light. Hanging in the kitchen is the gold key that Weight Watchers recently gave her in exchange for losing 22 pounds. Youngquist, who has survived three husbands, asks me not to mention her age -- "I had a boyfriend who was 12 years younger than me, and he thought we were the same age" -- but later she says she supposes it really wouldn't matter. "No, I don't like old age," she says, running her fingers through her hair. "I look in the mirror and I think, 'Dear God, I look terrible.' But . . . what are you going to do? There ain't no golden years."
19900228000000000	BOY, 5, WHO DRANK BOURBON 'LIKE A MAN' DIES IN TEXAS. A 5-year-old boy who drank 10 ounces of bourbon after an adult allegedly prompted him to drink it "like a man" died this morning after his removal from life support systems, authorities said. Thomas Griffin died at Cook-Ft. Worth Children's Medical Center about 8:45 a.m. The respirator supporting the youngster's breathing was disconnected Tuesday night, but the child had continued to breathe on his own. Police said the boy was given the alcohol at a party Friday night and "told to drink it like a man." Anthony Jimerson, 21, was being held in Tarrant County Jail in lieu of $100,000 bail after being charged with injury to a child. The boy was taken to the hospital Saturday afternoon after he went into convulsions. At one point, the boy's blood-alcohol level was about .55%. Doctors said he would probably have suffered irreversible brain damage. At the time the boy drank the liquor, Jimerson was visiting the apartment of Thomas' mother, Patricia Griffin, 31.
19900411000000000	WOMAN DIES AFTER JUDGE OKD RESPIRATOR REMOVAL. A paralyzed 50-year-old woman died today just minutes after doctors unhooked her life support system -- a move a judge ruled did not need court approval as long as it was requested by the patient. After a bedside meeting with her sister and her favorite nurse, Dr. James Sullivan unhooked the respirator that had kept Nancy Gamble alive for 14 months at Baptist Hospital, her attorney said. Gamble, 50, who was paralyzed by the incurable Lou Gehrig's disease, died "peacefully" 15 minutes later this morning, attorney Mary Martin Schaffner said. Davidson County Chancellor Robert Brandt ruled Tuesday in the right-to-die suit Gamble filed after Baptist Hospital refused to let her physician remove her respirator. The judge ruled that Gamble's physician could remove her respirator and for the first time in Tennessee, he also decided that physicians may act without any court's permission to honor a disabled patient's wish to die. Disabled rights activists protested Brandt's decision, calling it "further movement down the slippery slope of euthanasia of individuals whom society may perceive as unwanted burdens." But Brandt said: "This case does not involve suicide and it does not involve euthanasia. This case does not belong in court." The judge ruled that physicians may unhook the respirators of disabled patients as long as the patients are mentally competent, fully informed of their condition and voluntarily deciding to die. Brandt called it discriminatory to "impose the cumbersome legal process" on the disabled trying to decide their own medical treatment. "This court finds they should have the same right to decide their future as those who are not totally disabled," the judge said. A lawyer for ADAPT, or American Disabled for Attendant Programs Today, urged the court to assure that Gamble is offered suicide prevention counseling. ADAPT argued in court papers that Gamble could have lived independently with attendants to care for her at home and that she could have operated a computer with her mouth to communicate better. "Terminal illness should not be used to justify a wholesale abandonment of society's policies designed to protect human life," the group said. Schaffner said Brandt's ruling is the first in Tennessee to say disabled patients no longer must seek court permission to have respirators removed.
19900606000000000	AILING WOMAN USES DOCTOR'S SUICIDE DEVICE. An Alzheimer's patient traveled 2,000 miles to commit suicide with the help of a doctor who built a device that gave her a lethal dose of chemicals. The last thing Janet Adkins told Dr. Jack Kevorkian on Monday was, "You just make my case known." Then, he said, she pressed a button on the contraption that released the lethal mixture. Some medical ethicists Tuesday called the doctor's actions immoral and perhaps illegal. A prosecutor said he would wait for autopsy results before deciding whether to charge Kevorkian, and will seek an injunction to prevent the doctor from using the device again. Kevorkian told the Associated Press in a telephone interview late Tuesday that it was the first time he had used the device to assist a suicide. The Portland, Ore., woman's husband defended his wife's right to die. "It's not a matter of how long you live, but the quality of life you live, and it was her life and her decision and she chose," Ron Adkins told Portland's KATU-TV. "She made that decision based upon the fact that the things she loved most -- reading, literature, music -- and all that she couldn't do any more." One of the couple's three sons, Neil, said: "She was in a very good state of mind, that's the amazing thing. "It was not a desperate thing or a depressed situation. She was the one that helped us all through it," Neil Adkins told KGW-TV in Portland. Kevorkian said Mrs. Adkins traveled to Michigan during the weekend to use his suicide device. He drove the 54-year-old woman in his van to a park in northern Oakland County on Monday afternoon. According to Kevorkian, he and one of his relatives attached Adkins to a heart monitor, then put an intravenous tube in her arm. The tube first delivered a saline solution. Kevorkian said Adkins then pressed a button that injected thiopental, a coma-inducing drug, followed moments later by potassium chloride, which stops the heart within minutes. He said she was unconscious in 25 seconds, and died in five or six minutes. "It simulates exactly the judicial executions that we do now with legal executions, except with this device the person does it himself by pushing a button," Kevorkian told the Detroit News on Monday. The doctor is a retired pathologist and an outspoken advocate of what he calls doctor-assisted suicide. "Physicians should not be killers, even in cases where the patient requests it and there is a compassionate reason behind the act," said Susan Wolf of the Hastings Center for biomedical research in Briarcliff, N.Y. "They take an oath to do no harm, and taking a life is doing harm." Kevorkian said in March that he expected to be prosecuted after the first use of the drug-injecting device. He also said he would not charge patients and that he might use it to take his own life some day. After Adkins died, Kevorkian notified police. Oakland County prosecutor Richard Thompson said he won't decide if he will bring charges against the doctor until he gets an autopsy report and state police finish their investigation. The police have the device, Thompson added. Kevorkian said Adkins came to Michigan with her husband and a friend, both of whom stayed at a motel while she died and caught a flight back to Oregon later Monday night. In Oregon, providing the means to commit suicide is a felony, but Michigan has no law against suicide assisted by a physician. Kevorkian said the Adkinses contacted him in October after learning about his device, and he recommended treatment with an experimental drug at a Seattle hospital. "It didn't work," Ron Adkins said. "It was hard on us, all of us, because we've been mourning for an entire year knowing that this was what she had in mind." The device itself -- an aluminum frame with three suspended bottles and a small electric motor -- is not illegal, said Gerald Poisson, assistant Oakland County prosecutor. But in certain cases, the person who made it available to the suicide victim could be charged with homicide, he said. Jim Baughman of the Wayne County Prosecutor's Office in Detroit said last year that helping someone die would not be a crime if the patient injected the drugs. But two lawyers specializing in medical ethics, after hearing details of the Kevorkian case, said his actions were improper. "What this physician did was way over the line," Wolf said. "It was unethical and may well have been illegal." According to the American Medical Assn., passive euthanasia is ethical, said Reinhard Priester of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota. Passive euthanasia might, for example, involve withholding food from a comatose patient believed to have no chance of recovery, he said. But Priester said Kevorkian, by arranging a suicide ostensibly with the patient's consent, appeared to have participated in active euthanasia -- which the AMA has deemed morally inappropriate.
19900608000000000	ACCIDENT PUTS TEEN-AGE SKATEBOARDER IN COMA; TRAGEDY: A 19-YEAR-OLD BEING PULLED BY A CAR FALLS OFF HIS BOARD. HE'S NOT EXPECTED TO LIVE.. DANA POINT -- Joel Christopher Banks longed to be center-stage in the Southern California beach scene. Despite his parents' objections, the beach-crazy 19-year-old from Northern California packed up his things two years ago and moved to Laguna Niguel, where he found an apartment with three other young men who shared his unquenchable passion for surfing and skateboarding. On Wednesday night, however, his surfing ambitions were cut tragically short when he fell off his skateboard while hanging onto the back of his roommate's moving car and slammed his head onto the asphalt driveway of the Monarch Bay Plaza. By Thursday, Banks, who was described by friends and relatives as an energetic and happy young man, was near death. Lying in an intensive-care unit, he had slipped into a coma from a crushed skull and was not expected to live, said his father, Jeff Banks, who anxiously waited at Mission Hospital Regional Medical Center for word of his son's fate. If doctors by today cannot find activity in his brain, he will be disconnected from the life-support system, Jeff Banks said. Once disconnected from the life-support system, Banks is expected to die. He will be taken back to Dublin, a Bay Area town near Oakland, for burial. "He has big ideas, just like any other young man," Banks said of his son's other ambition of becoming an oceanographer in New Zealand. His son is a student at Saddleback College. "But if they didn't work out," Banks continued, "there's always Salt Creek" Beach, a popular South County surfing spot where he and his son shared the same waves when he came to South County on periodic visits. When Banks moved to Laguna Niguel, his father said, "it was like losing a friend." Graeme E. Swayn, also 19, said he, Banks and their two other roommates were preparing their evening meal Wednesday but needed to go to a supermarket in Monarch Bay Plaza to buy bread and hamburger. Banks and Swayn jumped on their skateboards and rode about a mile to the store, near the intersection of Crown Valley Parkway and South Coast Highway. Meanwhile, roommate Todd L. Caniglia, 23, followed them in his late-model Toyota Celica. After purchasing the groceries, the skateboarders asked Caniglia to tow them up a steep driveway leading out of the shopping center. They grabbed onto the trunk of the Celica as the car accelerated to about 20 m.p.h., Swayn said. A moment later, Swayn noticed a rough cement patch on the asphalt. "I saw the cement, yelled and jumped off," Swayn said. "Joel let go a split-second too late." The wheels on Banks' skateboard caught on the patch, knocking him backward to the ground, Swayn said. "His body got real stiff and he was moaning real loud," Swayn said. "I thought he was hurt just a little, but when I got there, the back of his head was all bloody." Orange County Sheriff's Department spokesman Richard J. Olson said that no one has been charged in the 8:06 p.m. accident but that an investigation is ongoing. Although no records are available on the number of skateboard-related accidents in Orange County, sheriff's officials said that as summer approaches, the number of skateboarders who get hurt is bound to rise. With the demise of skateboard parks because of high insurance rates, shopping centers are drawing an increasing number of skateboarders who intermingle dangerously with pedestrians and motorists while they plunge headlong off stairways and slide down metal handrails on their colorful boards, Lt. George Johnson said. "We get a steady barrage of calls from merchants," Johnson said. "You don't have to look far to see kids riding around in those areas (shopping centers) doing damage and scaring people to death." Indeed, one Monarch Bay Plaza flower stand operator said that bothersome skateboarders, most of whom are teen-agers, constantly crisscross the busy parking lot after school and on sunny weekends. "They do a lot of skateboarding down that hill," the woman said, gesturing toward the steep driveway. "I'm usually here on Fridays and Saturdays, and when they come, I chase them away. They come up here (near the theater) on the sidewalks. It's really risky." Linda Danylyshyn, who works in an office nearby, said: "I've chased kids out of the parking lot on skateboards because they're not allowed in here. Most of the time, they're not going to get hurt, but things can happen." Johnson said that in Mission Viejo alone, the vast majority of its estimated 17,000 teen-agers own skateboards, a more popular form of transportation than bicycling. And although Orange County and many cities have restrictive skateboard laws, there are not enough officers to enforce them, Johnson said. For instance, the deputy continued, it is against the county's skateboard law to ride down a public street. "We probably will never put a stop to it," Johnson said. "You have got to be there at the time ( of a violation)." But David Swift, associate editor of the Oceanside-based magazine Transworld Skateboarding, said serious accidents involving skateboards are extremely rare. Most of the opposition to the sport comes from people who wrongly believe that skateboarders purposely try to scare pedestrians, he said. "They (pedestrians) hear a skateboard and they freeze up," said Swift, a professional skateboarder. "It is definitely not one of the more dangerous sports. There are tons more people out there paralyzed from football injuries. There is definitely a lot of skateboard paranoia." Swift said that rather than complain, merchants and city officials should set up more professional skateboard parks, where riders could perform in a controlled environment. "These kids need a place to skate," Swift said, adding that it is a healthy sport that keeps "kids off the street. People complain, but they don't do anything about it." Swayn said that Banks is an accomplished skateboarder who never got in a serious accident before. He attributed the accident to fate. "We go skateboarding all over Salt Creek all the time," Swayn said. "He was a good skateboarder. I can't believe he lost it." Times staff writer Wendy Paulson contributed to this report. JUDGE OKS QUADRIPLEGIC'S PLEA TO BE ALLOWED TO DIE. A Nevada judge today granted the death wish of a quadriplegic who asked to be removed from a respirator that has sustained his life for more than 20 years. Kenneth A. Bergstedt, 31, said he no longer enjoys life and wants to die in peace. He asked the court to allow him to take a sedative and have his life-support system turned off. Bergstedt sought a legal ruling that his actions would not constitute suicide or a crime and that people who helped him would not be subject to prosecution. The case is believed to be the first of its kind to hit Nevada's courts and is only one of a handful of others documented in the nation. After an evidentiary hearing that lasted about an hour, state District Judge Donald Mosley found that Bergstedt was mentally competent to make the decision to end his life. The judge also ruled that the elements of homicide and suicide were not factors in the case. "The prognosis is less than encouraging, and there is no real likelihood that life will improve for Mr. Bergstedt," Mosley said in issuing the ruling.
19900610000000000	TERMINAL ILLNESS: AMERICANS BELIEVE DOCTORS SHOULD SOMETIMES ALLOW DEATH; EUTHANASIA: THE RELEVANCE OF RELIGION TO A PERSON'S LIFE AFFECTS OPINION ON RIGHT-TO-DIE ISSUES, RATHER THAN ADHERENCE TO A SPECIFIC SET OF RELIGIOUS BELIEFS.. When a doctor from Michigan helped an Oregon woman with Alzheimer's disease commit suicide last week, he knew his decision -- and hers -- would kindle a debate on medical ethics and mercy killing. While authorities debate the doctor's actions, a new survey shows that although some Americans might disagree with the methods used by Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a Detroit pathologist, all segments of the public support right-to-die policies. There is a widely held belief that physicians should sometimes allow a patient to die rather than use the full range of medical procedures and treatments available. And Americans, regardless of their religious beliefs, overwhelmingly support the right of patients to make their own decisions about life-sustaining treatment. If a person is unable to make his or her decisions known, people say a close family member should be allowed to make the call. These are among the findings of a Reflections of the Times poll of 1,213 adults nationwide. The poll was conducted for the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press in Washington, and examined public views about dealing with terminal illness and disability. The poll (with an error margin of 3%), conducted last month, showed: More than half of Americans, 59%, would want their doctors to stop administering life-sustaining treatment if they had a terminal disease and were suffering a great deal of physical pain. Those polled made a distinction between the decision to forgo life-sustaining treatment for adults and the decision of parents to withhold treatment for severely handicapped children. The strength of religious views play a key role in determining views about ending the life of a suffering person. One-third of adults can imagine themselves taking the life of a loved one who was suffering terribly from an illness that was terminal. Americans have profoundly mixed feelings about growing old. Only four in 10 adults would like to live to be 100 years old, and half would emphatically not want to be that old. Women especially do not look forward to reaching the milestone of their 100th birthday. Ironically, this accomplishment is more likely for a woman than a man. The public's feelings about right-to-die legislation is driven by its belief in the need for discretion in administering life-sustaining medical treatment. Eight in 10 adults approve of state laws that allow medical treatment for a terminally ill patient to be withdrawn or withheld, if that is what the patient wishes. Most states have some form of right-to-die legislation, and for the first time in its history, the U.S. Supreme Court is now considering whether there is a constitutional right to discontinue life-sustaining medical treatment in the case of Cruzan vs. Harmon. The public's attitude toward right-to-die legislation is bolstered by a trend toward greater acceptance of suicide in the face of suffering. About half of the public thinks a person has a moral right to commit suicide if suffering from an incurable disease or from great pain with no hope of improvement. Acceptance of suicide in such cases has been increasing gradually over the 15-year period since 1975, when these attitudes were first measured by the Gallup Poll. More than half, 55%, now think a person suffering great pain with no hope of improvement has a moral right to suicide, compared with only 41% 15 years ago. The increasing acceptance of suicide is largely due to the aging of the population. The older people who overwhelmingly rejected suicide as a response to terminal illness 15 years ago have died and been replaced in the population by younger people with more moderate views about the acceptability of suicide in these circumstances. Attitudes about suicide differ greatly depending on the strength of one's religious views. Most "born-again" Christians and very religious people reject a right to suicide even in the case of a terminal illness. They are fairly evenly divided in their attitudes about suicide when the patient is suffering great pain. Yet, paradoxically, a majority of "born-again" Christians and the very religious think acts of so-called "mercy killing" by spouses are sometimes justified. It appears that some Americans, particularly those who are very religious, make an important distinction between what is "justified" and what is a "right." This implies that the difficult decision to end a person's life is perhaps justified, understandable and acceptable, yet not endorsed. But the public makes a distinction between how decisions about medical treatment should be made for adults and how they should be made for infants. Half of the public rejects the notion that parents can refuse life-sustaining treatment on behalf of their severely handicapped infant, saying instead that such infants should receive as much treatment as possible. "It's difficult to agree on what the patient's best interests are in the case of a newborn and there's no way to extrapolate what the patient would want from knowledge of his or her life," said Susan M. Wolf, a lawyer with the Hastings Center, a research institute in New York that studies medical ethics. h Views on this issue are also profoundly influenced by religion, with "born-again" Christians and those who are very religious most opposed to parental decision-making in these cases. In fact, majority support for the right of parents to refuse medical treatment only occurs among those who say religion is unimportant in their lives It is the relevance of religion to a person's day-to-day life that affects opinion on right-to-die issues, rather than one's adherence to a specific set of religious beliefs. The views that Americans express about right-to-die policies reflect their personal feelings about how they would want their own medical treatment handled in various situations, and what they know or can imagine about the wishes of their parents. Not only do most Americans want life-sustaining treatment to cease in the event of terminal illness with severe pain, they also want doctors to withhold extended treatment if they had an illness that made them totally dependent on another family member for daily care. The wish to have life-sustaining medical treatment withdrawn decreases as the importance of religion increases. However, a majority (52%) of even the very religious would want their own treatment stopped if they were suffering a great deal of physical pain. But fewer people are willing to say they would take part in a mercy killing. Only a third of adults can imagine themselves taking the life of a loved one who was suffering terribly from an illness that was terminal. The ability to imagine the mercy killing of a spouse or other loved one is greater for men. But that desire decreases significantly with age, presumably as the possibility of actually facing such a choice becomes more likely.  The Right to Die the poll of 1,213 adults last month gauged the views of people about mercy killing against the importance of religion in their lives. Do you approve or disapprove of laws that let terminally ill patients decide about being kept alive through medical treatment? In actual number of respondents: Approve Very Religious: 825 Somewhat Religious: 452 Not Religious: 221  Disapprove Very Religious: 148 Somewhat Religious: 49 Not Religious: 42  It depends Very Religious: 58 Somewhat Religious: 20 Not Religious: 11  Don't know Very Religious: 49 Somewhat Religious: 10 Not Religious: 2 Source: Times Mirror Center for People and the Press COLUMN RIGHT; GADGET TO HELP SUICIDE OPENS PANDORA'S BOX; WE'RE DEEP INTO A PROCESS THAT'S ALTERING OUR NATION'S CHARACTER.. Last week, in a Detroit suburb, Dr. Jack Kevorkian climbed into his Volkswagen van with 54-year-old Janet Adkins and drove off to a public park. There, he hooked up Adkins, who suffered from early Alzheimer's, to his homemade suicide machine. A syringe in her arm, Adkins pushed a button that sent two fluids into her body. One left her unconscious, the second stopped her heart. Her last act, said Kevorkian, was to rise as though to kiss him, and say, "Thank you, thank you, thank you." A modern love story. Kevorkian's lone regret: The dawdling medical examiner did not rush Adkins' body to a hospital. "You could have sliced her liver in half," he said, "and saved two babies and her bone marrow could have been taken, her heart, two kidneys, two lungs, a pancreas." Good old Doc Kevorkian, always thinking of somebody else. While commentators are saying that Kevorkian has re-ignited the "debate" over the "right to die," there really is no debate. There are just two schools of irreconcilable thought, whose adherents talk past one another. The first believes that all men are "endowed by their Creator" with "inalienable rights," and among these is the "right to life." The second holds that, as there is a right to live, so there is a right to die, that some lives are not worth living and that rational men and women, in a democratic society, can make these choices. While it is easy to recoil at the seeming callousness of Kevorkian, it is hard to deny he is on the cutting edge of social change. Thirty years ago, Americans argued over whether it was moral for a woman whose fetus had been deformed by thalidomide to have an abortion. Now abortion is a constitutional right -- 25 million have been performed -- and now we argue over the morality of denying food and water to deformed infants. Few may acknowledge it, but we are far along in a process that is altering the character of our nation. The first, critical step was to deny that all life is a gift from God, and that no man can take it; and to assert, instead, our right to decide when a human being is a "person." We did that in Roe vs. Wade. The second step was to assert that some persons are better off dead, such as comatose accident victims whose agonized loved ones want to stop the feeding. The third step is to assert a "right to die," and a concomitant duty to assist individuals who seek to exercise it. This is the position of Dr. Kevorkian and the Hemlock Society, and it leads logically to step four: If it is reasonable for someone to choose death, is it not equally reasonable for us to choose it for those who cannot make the decision themselves, i.e., the incurably insane and terminally ill who do not enjoy even the quality of life of Janet Adkins, who could play tennis right up until she got into that van? Indeed, if a lethal injection is the dignified way out for Adkins, why is it not also a dignified way out for the homeless, who, enfeebled, rummage through garbage cans for food? (To quote Dr. Kevorkian, "What kind of life is that?") And, if Adkins' decision was rational, why is it not equally rational to ask all those with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and terminal cancer to consider the same "final option." Perhaps Kevorkian has, in his machine, the final solution AIDS. We are not far away from entertaining such ideas. Some environmentalists applaud China's one-couple, one-child policy, where forced abortions and the killing of female infants are common. In California, Dianne Feinstein, candidate for governor, was forced by a feminist inquisition to recant her view that abortion for sex selection should be restricted. Fetal farming -- pregnancies and abortions to give us spare parts for research and sick patients -- is openly discussed. Once all the other frontiers have been crossed, the final one is the great leap forward by the state, when it declares that, just as a mother has the right to terminate the life of her unborn, just as loved ones have the right to pull the plug, so the state has a right to rid itself of those who threaten the social organism. Inexorably, we reach the fundamental question: Is there a higher law -- call it God's law or natural law -- to which man-made law must conform? And if no higher law exists, upon what moral ground did we stand to condemn the German doctors whose "crimes against humanity" consisted only of doing to the feebleminded exactly what we seek to do today?
19900611000000000	NATION IN BRIEF; OREGON; 'SUICIDE MACHINE' USER IS EULOGIZED. Friends and relatives gathered at the First Unitarian Church in Portland, Ore., for a memorial service for Janet Elaine Adkins, 54, who used a controversial machine to commit suicide last week in Michigan. Adkins had planned the joyful, hourlong ceremony before traveling to Michigan, where Dr. Jack Kevorkian hooked her up to the suicide machine he invented. She touched a button, releasing an anesthetic followed by a lethal injection. Seconds later, she was dead. Adkins was suffering from Alzheimer's disease and feared mental deterioration.
19900614000000000	HUSBAND FLED AFTER 'MACHINE' SUICIDE. Ronald Adkins, husband of the Portland, Ore., woman who committed suicide with the assistance of a doctor near here last week, tried to leave the area quickly on the afternoon of his wife's death and initially tried to evade police questioning, state police and local prosecutors said. Not until he was in the doorway of an airplane at Detroit's Metropolitan Airport and being questioned by a Michigan State Police detective for a second time did Adkins acknowledge that he was the husband of the dead woman, Janet Adkins, a 54-year-old Alzheimer's disease patient, officials here said. "He wanted to get out of our jurisdiction as quickly as possible," said one prosecutor involved in the case, who asked not to be identified. "He wanted to disappear." "It seemed unusual to me that, if a man knew his wife was going to die, that he wouldn't stick around and at least take care of the arrangements," added Sgt. Terry Saunders, the detective who first questioned Adkins. Saunders went to the airport simply to notify Adkins that his wife had died. Saunders canvassed everyone waiting to board the aircraft on which Adkins was to be a passenger. Although Adkins was among them, he did not step forward until the airline gate attendant saw his ticket and pointed him out to Saunders. Saunders then asked Adkins to accompany him while he telephoned the state police post in suburban Pontiac, which was handling the case. Adkins refused to do so and boarded the plane, according to Saunders. His suspicions aroused, the detective then called for more information and learned, for the first time, that a "medically supervised" suicide had taken place. Saunders was asked to confirm Ronald Adkins' identity, so he then acted to detain the flight. Adkins came off the plane and acknowledged that he knew about the suicide. He told Saunders he would be willing to cooperate in any investigation. Saunders had not been asked to detain Adkins, however, so the husband then left for Portland, leaving behind his wife's body and many of her personal effects, local officials said. He had left cremation instructions with a Detroit area funeral home, prosecutors said, but the body was held for an autopsy by the Oakland County, Mich., medical examiner. The body has since been released. State police and prosecutors said that, if not for poor communications between officials at the scene of Janet Adkins' death and Saunders at the airport, the husband probably would have been held for further questioning. Prosecutors are now awaiting an autopsy report and the completion of a state police report to determine whether criminal charges should be brought against anyone involved in the death, most notably Dr. Jack Kevorkian, the retired pathologist from the Detroit suburb of Royal Oak, Mich., who helped Janet Adkins kill herself. Ronald Adkins, an investment broker in Portland, did not return telephone calls to his home and office Wednesday. The June 4 death of Janet Adkins, who killed herself in the back of a rusting 1968 Volkswagen van with the aid of a drug-dispensing "suicide machine" devised by Kevorkian, has caused a nationwide sensation and sparked emotional debate over the "right to die." Since his return to Portland, Adkins has publicly supported his wife's decision to end her life. He has appeared on television talk shows and given a wide range of interviews. Last Friday, Oakland County Circuit Judge Alice Gilbert issued a preliminary injunction barring Kevorkian from assisting any further suicides in the state. Kevorkian later said that he would not violate that order. In a hearing before the ruling, Kevorkian told the court he first spoke with Janet Adkins the weekend before her death, when she and her husband flew to Michigan to meet him. Before that, he said, he had spoken only with Ronald Adkins. He said the husband first contacted him last October, after Janet Adkins had read about his "suicide machine." Ronald Adkins contacted Kevorkian again in May, the doctor said, after some special treatments had failed to slow Janet Adkins' decline. Ronald Adkins told Kevorkian by phone that his wife was more eager than ever to end her suffering.
19900619000000000	BOY, 14, CHARGED WITH MURDER OF HIS SISTER, 12. Murder charges were filed Monday against a 14-year-old Anaheim boy after his 12-year-old sister died earlier in the day from a gunshot wound to the head. Gema Marie Hubler, who had been comatose since the shooting last Thursday in the upstairs bedroom of their Anaheim Shores home, died at 1:30 p.m. at UCI Medical Center in Orange after members of her family decided to remove her from a hospital life support system. The brother, Richard Hubler, who had been arrested after the shooting, remained in custody in the Orange County Juvenile Hall. Deputy Dist. Atty. Brent Romney said the youth will be tried as a juvenile. A detention hearing is scheduled for this morning in Orange County Juvenile Court to determine if he should be released to his parents pending trial. Anaheim Police Lt. Marc Hedgpeth declined Monday to elaborate on why police sought the murder charges other than to say: "We have enough cause to file the charges, from physical evidence and statements." Hedgpeth said Friday that detectives have discredited the brother's original story that his sister had been shot during a break-in Thursday by "three masked men." Police arrested the youth when they discovered inconsistencies in his statement about the break-in and noted that he did not call for help promptly. Paramedics found the unconscious girl covered by a blanket, her head wrapped with white bandages. Neither child had been at school the day of the shooting. Police said the boy was alone with his sister and had been firing the weapon earlier in the back yard. Hedgpeth said gunshot residue tests of the youth's hands were taken after the shooting and that the results should be available in several days. According to school records and interviews with classmates of both children, Gema was a bright sixth-grader who excelled in science, while her brother, an eighth-grader, ran with rougher youths and was on the brink of dropping out.
19900625000000000	JUSTICES GIVE STATE PRIORITY OVER PARENT IN LIFE SUPPORT CASE. The Supreme Court, in its first ruling in a "right-to-die" case, said today states may bar the removal of life-sustaining treatment from comatose patients who have not made or cannot make their desires known. By a 5-4 vote, the justices blocked the parents of a permanently unconscious Missouri woman, Nancy Cruzan, from ordering the removal of tubes that provide her with food and water. The court said Cruzan's rights were not violated by allowing the state's interest in preserving life to outweigh her parents' wishes. But the court, indirectly supporting so-called "living will" laws, said the Constitution guarantees a competent person a right to refuse medical treatment. That issue was not presented squarely in the Cruzan case since she is incompetent to decide her future, the court said. Dick Kurtenbach, who has worked with the Cruzans as head of the Kansas City, Mo., office of the American Civil Liberties Union, commented: "When we looked at it realistically, and with the recent history of the court, this is not that surprising. "I'm sure the family is going to be extremely disappointed." Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, writing for the court, said Missouri may require "clear and convincing" proof that Cruzan wants to die before allowing the withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment. Such evidence is lacking in Cruzan's case, he said. The chief justice also said that "not all incompetent patients will have loved ones available to serve as surrogate decision makers. A state is entitled to guard against potential abuses in such situations." "In sum, we conclude that a state may apply a clear and convincing evidence standard in proceedings where a guardian seeks to discontinue nutrition and hydration of a person diagnosed to be in a persistent vegetative state," Rehnquist said. He was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin J. Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy. Dissenting were Justices William J. Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun and John Paul Stevens. Brennan, in an opinion joined by Marshall and Blackmun, said, "Nancy Cruzan is entitled to choose to die with dignity." Missouri and the Supreme Court "have displaced Nancy's own assessment of the processes associated with dying," Brennan said. "They have discarded evidence of her will, ignored her values, and deprived her of the right to a decision as closely approximating her own choice as humanly possible." But Brennan said he is heartened that the court tentatively concluded that in some cases a competent person must be allowed to choose death. State courts generally have permitted removal of life-sustaining treatment for patients like Cruzan. NANCY CRUZAN FAMILY'S LONG WAIT GOES ON. For Joe Cruzan and his family, the legal fight to let their comatose daughter die is over. Now comes what could be years of waiting while she lies attached to a hospital feeding tube. The U.S. Supreme Court barred the removal of her life-sustaining tube today in its first ruling in a "right-to-die" case. To the family, the facts were painfully simple: They wanted death to become a reality for 32-year-old Nancy, who has been in a persistent vegetative state since a January, 1983, car crash. She is being kept alive by a surgically implanted feeding tube at the Missouri Rehabilitation Center in Mt. Vernon. Doctors say she has no hope of recovery, but could remain alive for many years. A voice on the telephone answering machine at the home of Joe and Joyce Cruzan in Carterville, Mo., said the family will have no response to the high court's decision until they have had time to analyze the ruling. In a statement, Gov. John Ashcroft said he is grateful the court backed the state's position. He also said that "our thoughts and prayers remain with the Cruzan family." For Joe Cruzan, a sheet metal worker from Carterville, there's no doubt about what his daughter would have wanted. "She would say 'Pull the plug, stop it. I don't want to live like this. I have no dignity,' " Cruzan said in an interview last year. "If she had her way, she'd like to come back like she was. That's what I wish, but it's not going to happen."
19900626000000000	COURT LETS STATES PLACE LIMITS ON THE RIGHT TO DIE. The Supreme Court, in its first decision on the "right-to-die" issue, ruled Monday that the parents of a comatose woman do not have an automatic right under the U.S. Constitution to insist that hospital workers stop feeding her. Although a conscious patient has a right to reject all medical treatment, the high court said, the patient's family may not automatically invoke that right if the patient cannot speak for herself. Rather, a state is entitled to require that the family prove by "clear and convincing evidence" that the patient would wish to die, the court said. The 5-4 decision means that a 32-year-old Missouri woman, Nancy Cruzan, will continue to be kept alive in a hospital. More broadly, the ruling means that some sensitive issues involving what has come to be called the right to die will continue to be decided on a state-by-state basis. For Californians, the impact of Monday's high court ruling should be minimal. Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, the court's foremost proponent of states' rights, said that state legislatures and state courts may use their own constitutions and laws to decide under what circumstances a life may be ended. In a 1988 decision cited by Rehnquist, the California courts said that a patient not only has a right to die but that a family member or legal guardian may make that final decision on behalf of a comatose or terminally ill patient. Because that state court ruling is based on state law, it is unaffected by Monday's high court ruling interpreting the U.S. Constitution, the chief justice said. "The real message of this decision is: Make your choices known and they will be respected," said Alexander Capron, a USC professor of law and medicine. Even in Missouri, the state judges would have let Nancy die if she had spoken to her doctor on the subject or signed a "living will" expressing her views, Capron said. Monday's ruling, far from answering all the questions on the right-to-die issue, ensures that it will continue to be debated in hospitals, legislatures and state courts. And for good reason. Thanks to recent advances in medical technology, most Americans now face the likelihood that they -- or someone else -- will make decisions affecting when they die. About 2 million Americans die each year. About 80% of those deaths take place in a hospital or nursing home. And, in nearly every such death, a crucial decision is made at some point by a doctor, the patient or a relative on whether to stop, start or continue a potentially life-prolonging course of medical treatment. Since 1976, when New Jersey teen-ager Karen Ann Quinlan lapsed into a coma, state courts have struggled to set rules on when medical treatment, life support and even food and water may be cut off from a still-living patient. A legal consensus had developed since then. At least 27 state courts have upheld a right to die for patients who have no hope of recovery, according to the Society for the Right to Die in New York. The Supreme Court had stood aside until now. It let stand a number of state court rulings upholding a right to die but refused to say whether any such right is included in the U.S. Constitution. But, two years ago, the Missouri Supreme Court departed from the consensus by ruling that the state's interest in "the right to life" outweighs the parents' assertion of their daughter's right to die. In a 4-3 decision, the Missouri court pointed out that Nancy Cruzan was not in pain, was not terminally ill and had not stated a clear view on whether she would want to die. Therefore, the state court said, it would "err on the side of life" and reject the parents' request to end her life. On the night of Jan. 11, 1983, Nancy Cruzan was driving alone on an icy road, lost control of her car and was seriously injured. After being rushed to a hospital by paramedics, she was kept alive but never regained consciousness. Her family initially agreed to have a tube implanted in her stomach for food and water. Now, she is classified, like an estimated 10,000 Americans, as being in a "persistent vegetative state." In the years before the accident, Nancy had told a friend that she would not want to live as a "vegetable." Based on that evidence, a judge in Missouri had granted a request by Joe and Joyce Cruzan, Nancy's parents, to order the hospital to stop feeding her. But Missouri Atty. Gen. William Webster appealed to the state Supreme Court. Because the parents could not furnish "clear and convincing evidence" that Nancy would wish to die, she must be kept alive, the state court ruled. The Cruzans then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. "We hold there is nothing in the U.S. Constitution that prohibits Missouri from requiring clear and convincing proof" that a patient would have wanted her life ended, Rehnquist said in announcing Monday's ruling (Cruzan vs. Missouri Department of Health, 88-1503). He pointed out that the "risk of an erroneous decision" could cause judges to be cautious. As was noted in several friend-of-the-court briefs filed in the case, families of comatose patients sometimes stand to inherit large amounts of money if the relative dies. Although Rehnquist's opinion is a setback for the right-to-die movement, it is not a total loss. In a roundabout way, the chief justice endorsed the notion that a competent person has a constitutional right to reject all medical treatment, including food and water. The 14th Amendment says that a state may not "deprive any person of . . . liberty . . . without due process of law." This clause, Rehnquist said, establishes "the principle that a competent person has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical treatment." This right includes, he added, "a constitutionally protected right to refuse life-saving hydration and nutrition." However, in a footnote, the chief justice said that this right to reject medical treatment does not stem from a general constitutional "right of privacy," a point that has been the focus of the abortion fight. His opinion was joined by Justices Byron R. White, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and Antonin Scalia. Rehnquist focused on the broad picture, but the dissenters focused on Nancy Cruzan and concluded that she should be allowed to die. She "has dwelt in a twilight zone for six years. She is oblivious to her surroundings and will remain so," said Justice William J. Brennan Jr. Also dissenting were Justices Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun and John Paul Stevens.
19900722000000000	NEIGHBORS SAY FARMER WAS NO BROTHER KILLER. For decades, the Ward "boys" tended the dairy herd on their farm at the end of a dirt road and, neighbors say, pretty much minded their own business. "They live off by themselves, but they're not hermits or recluses," said Emilie Stilwell. "They're a throwback to the pioneer days. They stick to themselves, but if you were raising a barn they'd be the first to arrive and the last to leave." Four brothers, four bachelors. That all changed forever on June 6 when William Ward died -- of suffocation, authorities said -- and Delbert Ward was arrested and charged with second-degree murder. The tiny rural communities of Munnsville (pop. 400) and Stockbridge (pop. 140) have rallied around Delbert Ward. His neighbors say he could not possibly have killed his brother. Nearly 900 people have signed petitions calling on the county prosecutor to review the autopsy report on William Ward. When a judge set bail at $10,000 on June 25, Delbert Ward's supporters raised the sum outside the courtroom within a few minutes. Delbert, 59, has been advised by his attorney not to discuss the case. At a July 8 banquet that raised almost $1,500 for his defense, he told about 1,000 of his supporters: "I have a lot of friends all over this county. I thought I'd be left in jail, but my friends brought me home." Deborah Wilson of Munnsville, who contributed $500 on the spot to Delbert's bail, said: "You have to act on your beliefs when something like this happens. I just know there's no way he could have killed his brother." State police investigators testified at a preliminary hearing that Delbert told them the death of 64-year-old Bill was a mercy killing. Investigators say that Delbert told them he smothered Bill in his sleep. According to the initial autopsy report, a benign tumor the size of a golfball was found in Bill's neck, and he had kidney and prostate tumors that might have been cancerous. "Bill had trouble with his head. He accidentally cut his jaw with a chain saw (years ago) and got blood poisoning," said Roscoe Ward, 70, the eldest brother. "He was doing farm chores up to the day he died, but he wasn't doing too good. He'd be burning up, and the next time he'd be shaking all over." Asked whether he thought Delbert was innocent, Roscoe Ward replied: "I sure do." The Wards' small farm is on a hill overlooking the undeveloped Stockbridge Valley, about 30 miles southeast of Syracuse. A lifetime's collection of odds and ends, old appliances and crumbling farm machinery is strewn about the old, unpainted farmhouse where the brothers have lived since their childhood. They have running water and electricity but no telephone and not much else in the way of conveniences. "Their parents lived there and they took care of them until they died, and they just stayed," Stilwell said. The Wards, especially Delbert and Bill, whom friends say were inseparable, were often seen at The Shack, the Munnsville coffee shop where Stilwell works. They made frequent trips to town to shop and buy new parts for their farm machinery. None of the four had a driver's license; they would drive their tractor the 5 miles into town. At the July 8 banquet, Stilwell sold several pictures of Delbert and Bill riding on the tractor for $3 each. The Wards are described as happy and generous neighbors, self-educated and hard-working. Delbert is the youngest. Bill was called the leader. Roscoe never stops talking once he starts. Lyman is bashful. It wasn't difficult to get townsfolk in Munnsville to rally around the Wards after Delbert's arrest, Grant Kroneck, a local insurance agent, said. "I've lived in Munnsville since 1947, and I've never seen a community come so solidly together on one side of an issue that like this," he said. Within hours after Delbert's arrest, Stilwell and Kroneck were circulating a petition challenging a medical examiner's report that Bill was killed and asking for a second autopsy. "I knew we had some friends," said Roscoe Ward. "I just didn't know we had friends like that." Madison County District Attorney Donald Cerio Jr. agreed to a review of the autopsy findings. He has said he will not seek a grand jury indictment before that review is completed. "This particular case is quite unique in the intensity of emotions stirred by those persons acquainted with the Ward family," said Cerio. He said he doesn't believe Delbert is dangerous, but he is confident that he is being justly prosecuted. Jars and plastic containers were set out at businesses in town and within days, $1,800 was collected, said Stilwell. The money was used to hire two private investigators to bolster Delbert's case. The total raised since has climbed to almost $3,500.
19900801000000000	FLORIDA TO SET FREE AILING 'MERCY KILLER'. Florida officials signed clemency orders today for an 81-year-old man convicted of shooting his ailing wife in what he said was a mercy killing. Gov. Bob Martinez and three Cabinet members signed the order for health reasons with the conditions that Roswell Gilbert keep contact with probation officers and not possess any weapons. Gilbert could be released from prison as early as Thursday, officials said. "A just society is one that tempers the need for punishment with the compassion that is our hallmark as a people," said Martinez, who three years ago rejected Gilbert's clemency request. "Mr. Gilbert's declining health, and the likelihood that his condition will continue to deteriorate if he remains in prison, leads me to the conclusion that he should be granted clemency," Martinez said in a written statement. Gilbert is serving a minimum mandatory sentence of life without chance of parole for 25 years for killing his wife, who suffered from Alzheimer's disease and osteoporosis. He was the subject of a 1987 television movie that dramatized his decision. "O Lord, it's just such wonderful news," said Gilbert's daughter, Martha Moran, in Baltimore. "It's just wonderful." "I saw Dad last Thursday," she said. "He was doing OK considering the circumstances. I know he will be absolutely thrilled to death at getting out, of course." Moran said she will return to Florida immediately to help her father resettle. "I hope the readjustment to life outside the prison won't be too difficult for him," she said. Gilbert was examined in January, and a medical report by Dr. Irene Cody showed that he suffered from heart and lung disease and was considered "at high risk of death at any time" because of his age and physical condition. The prosecution claimed that Gilbert, a retired engineer, killed his 72-year-old wife, Emily, in March, 1985, after 51 years of marriage because she had become a burden to him.
19900816000000000	DEATH OF A DREAM; WOMAN KIDNAPED AT DISCO IS REMOVED FROM LIFE-SUPPORT SYSTEM. She had been an A student, her mother said, but when the baby came, she dropped out of school. Still, 19-year-old Karen Eickholdt had plans. Someday, she would tell her mother, she would get out of Compton and manage a big hotel -- one in Hawaii, perhaps. Her dream ended at 4:20 p.m. Tuesday when she was removed from a life-support system at Greater El Monte Community Hospital. There was no chance, doctors concluded, that Eickholdt would recover from massive head injuries suffered during a brief abduction outside a popular El Monte disco early Monday morning. As family and friends remembered Eickholdt, El Monte police and sheriff's homicide detectives reported little progress Wednesday in the hunt for her killers. Eickholdt, several witnesses told detectives, had been accosted by two men outside Mr. J's disco and dragged halfway into the cab of a gray pickup that then sped away. After traveling about one block, Eickholdt was either thrown to the pavement or struggled free and fell, suffering the fatal injuries. Doctors determined her to be brain dead Monday, and a Catholic priest administered last rites. Her mother, Ursula Garcia, said family members and friends gathered in her room Tuesday afternoon and prayed for her once again. "When we were praying, several of us saw her hand move, like she was in relief," Ursula Garcia said. A short time later, Garcia gave permission for the life-support system to be detached. The oldest of Ursula Garcia's five children, Eickholdt had a 4-year-old son, Sergio, as well as three brothers, a sister and a stepfather. She is also survived by her father, a resident of Atascadero. Born in West Germany, where her father was stationed in the Army, Karen Eickholdt had spent her early years in Michigan and California's central coast. For the last 11 years she had lived in Paramount and Compton, and had attended Dominguez High School before dropping out. Recently, her mother said, she had been attending night school to earn a high school diploma. She had talked of joining the National Guard and eventually entering the hotel business. "She had big plans. She wanted to get into management," her mother said. "She was telling me she'd get a home for me and home for herself -- a big one in front, and a small one in back for her and Sergio." Her daughter loved to dance and on nights when she wasn't attending class, would go with friends to Mr. J's disco 20 miles away in El Monte, Garcia said. "She went to El Monte because she felt Compton was too rowdy, too dangerous," Eickholdt's godmother, Christina Mercado, said. "She was a very fun person," Mercado said. "Always there to help people who needed help. A kind person." Mercado said she is attempting to establish a trust fund for Sergio. El Monte Police Detective Butch Reyburn said a reward of a still unspecified amount is being offered for information leading to the arrest of the killers. They were described as Latino men, about 20 years of age. The truck was described as a 1964 to 1966 gray step-side pickup with a black left front fender, and an old California license plate with yellow numbers and letters against a black background. Investigators asked anyone with information to call El Monte police at (818) 580-1200 or the sheriff's detectives at (213) 974-4341. Detectives are planning to pass out flyers soliciting information at Mr. J's, Reyburn said. It is believed the two suspects may have been patrons. "Other than that," Reyburn said, "we haven't got anything going."
19900821000000000	WORLD IN BRIEF; FLORIDA; LIFE SUPPORT ENDED; COCAINE VICTIM DIES. A Miami man who slipped into a coma after drinking a Colombian soft drink that had been laced with cocaine in an apparent smuggling scheme died after doctors disconnected life-support equipment. Maximo Rene Menendez, 25, collapsed on July 26 after drinking from a six-ounce bottle of Pony Malta de Bavaria. FBI experts have discovered at least 45 contaminated bottles containing 20 to 40 grams of the drug in a 1,000-case shipment of the soft drink. Federal officials warned consumers that hundreds of cases of Pony Malta distributed in southern Florida are unaccounted for.
19900908000000000	MAN HELPS WIFE IN SUICIDE, NOW FACES MURDER CHARGE; MERCY DEATH: CALIFORNIANS THOUGHT MICHIGAN LAW WAS LENIENT. THEY PICKED WRONG STATE AT THE WRONG TIME.. Bertram R. Harper says his wife died Aug. 19 exactly the way she wanted, in a motel room, with her husband and daughter holding her hands, comforting her and in a state where she believed they wouldn't be prosecuted for their assistance in her death. After she had stopped breathing that stormy night, Harper, 72, called the police. He and his stepdaughter told them exactly what happened -- how they had come from Loomis, Calif., near Sacramento; how Virginia Harper, 69, suffering from advanced cancer, had taken sleeping pills and how he had assisted her in slipping a plastic bag over her head. When the first few attempts failed, he told them, he'd waited until she had fallen asleep and then put the bag on her himself. He secured it around her neck with rubber bands. "We didn't expect problems," said Harper, a retired chemical engineer. "We wanted to come here, my wife wanted to have a suicide very quietly and with no notoriety and that would be the end of it." His voice cracks when he speaks of it. "That's why we came to Michigan." Instead, Harper was charged with murder. Wayne County Prosecutor John O'Hara wanted to send a message, two months after a Michigan doctor, Jack Kevorkian, had made headlines by using his so-called "suicide machine" to help an Oregon woman die: The state is no mecca for mercy killing. Kevorkian has not been charged in Oakland County, where his actions took place, but Harper was put in jail. After a week behind bars, a California bail bondsman posted the $25,000 bail and won his release. "It is important for people to know," the prosecutor said in a statement after murder charges were filed and while Harper was incarcerated, "that Michigan is not a state where people can assist in suicides, commit euthanasia or murder and escape criminal responsibility for their acts." Now Harper, fighting to stay out of prison, is becoming a cause celebre and a symbol to the growing and increasingly vocal pro-euthanasia movement. "I think it's tragic," said Derek Humphry, national director of the Hemlock Society, an organization that supports euthanasia and to which Harper belongs. The organization is helping to pay for Harper's attorney and has created a defense fund. "It's sort of like innocents abroad," Humphry said of the family. "These are good, decent people, going all that way to keep from getting into trouble and then getting into more trouble than they imagined." In a hearing Friday, a district judge ruled that there is sufficient evidence for Harper to stand trial on charges of open murder -- which may be defined at trial as first- or second-degree murder or manslaughter -- and of conspiring with his stepdaughter to commit murder. His stepdaughter, Shanda McGrew, who was in the motel room and who has stood by Harper's side since then, is not being charged. "I don't think any jury is going to convict this man of anything," Harper's attorney, Hugh M. Davis, said after the hearing. "This is a case of love and death, and which will prevail. We believe love will." The Harpers traveled to Michigan because of a paragraph in one of Humphry's books that mentions a 1983 case in which the Michigan Court of Appeals threw out murder charges against a man who had obtained a gun and ammunition and left them with a depressed friend who shot himself. The court ruled that because the Legislature had not defined aiding suicide as a crime, the man's actions could not be classified as homicide. Hoping to avoid prosecution, Harper on Aug. 18 bought plane tickets to Detroit. It was two weeks after Virginia had been told by her doctor that she had terminal cancer and one day after she had awakened one morning in excruciating pain and said she was ready to end it. "We've been married 23 years and this is something we'd discussed over the years," Harper said. "It wasn't necessarily like a suicide pact or anything like that, but we both considered the quality of life the essential thing, not how long you lived." The couple had friends who had died very painful, lingering deaths, Harper said. "We've seen people die deaths that you wouldn't put a dog through," he said. "If you did, you'd land in jail." They agreed that they'd each rather commit suicide than face painful deaths. They joined the Hemlock Society in the mid-1980s, sometime after Virginia first discovered she had breast cancer in 1983. The lump was removed. Then, in 1989, another tumor was discovered. It, too, was removed. It wasn't until early August that she discovered the cancer had spread to her liver. The doctor gave her from "two months to two years" to live, Harper said. That's when his wife began getting her affairs in order and when he began preparing himself emotionally to help, Harper said. Assistant Prosecutor Tim Kenny argued Friday, however, that Harper did more than aid in his wife's suicide. "The evidence has indicated that Mr. Harper was motivated by love for his wife and was concerned and moved by his wife's suffering," he said. But, noting a coroner's ruling that Virginia Harper died of asphyxiation caused by the plastic bag and not from an overdose of sleeping pills, Kenny said: "This is in fact a mercy killing." Acknowledging what he called "on-going and increasingly loud societal concerns" about euthanasia, Kenny argued that until the Legislature passes a law allowing mercy killing, the government has no choice but to prosecute it. Pro-euthanasia initiatives are being advanced in four states -- Washington, California, Florida and Oregon, Humphry said. Farthest along is Washington. A spokesman for Washington Citizens for Death with Decency, said 145,700 signatures have been gathered on petitions. Only 150,000 are needed to put the issue on the ballot. "It's fairly certain that in Washington in November of 1991 there will be the first ever vote on euthanasia," Humphry said by telephone from his office in Eugene, Ore. The Hemlock Society director estimated that "many hundreds" of terminally ill people have used the methods described in his books to kill themselves. This is the first time to his knowledge, however, that anyone has gone to Michigan to do it to escape prosecution, he said. If the Harpers had contacted him first, he said, he would have advised them against it. Both Virginia's death and the legal aftermath would have gone more smoothly in the calmness of her own home and in a community where the family is known, he said. Davis argued unsuccessfully Friday that the harshest charge Harper should face is voluntary manslaughter, which carries a possible sentence of 15 years. The judge refused to reduce the charge, however, leaving the issue for a circuit court to decide. The second count against Harper, conspiracy to commit murder, carries a mandatory life sentence, Davis said. Harper said that once before his wife attempted suicide alone. "It happened very suddenly while I was away," he told authorities in a statement. "I came home and there was a message from a friend to meet Ginger at a Holiday Inn in Sacramento." When he inquired about her at the front desk, he was told that she had rented a room. He found the key in the door, he said. When he entered, he said in an interview, he found her sitting on the floor, slumped against a wall. She had taken sleeping pills, and they had taken effect before she could put the plastic bag in place, he said. She resolved after that never to attempt it again without her family near, Harper said. Even now, Harper's eyes light up remembering her, and he can laugh. Not remembering the last part. Remembering her. Here, in a lawyer's office, with her gone and him in a mess of trouble -- more trouble than either of them had bargained for -- Harper's belly shakes and his eyes twinkle. Virginia can still make him laugh. She was irrepressible. How else to say it? Harper was wearing a shirt Virginia had made for him, a beige and brown nature print that matches one of her outfits. She would do that, have shirts made from the material left over from the dresses she sewed. The two of them would walk around in matching outfits. "It was Ginger's way of saying I belonged to her," said Harper. She liked bright colors. In 1967, when they were married, she owned a chartreuse '56 T-bird with floral interior. That was the kind of person she was. Both had been married previously. They met through a personal ad she ran in Fact magazine, a national publication, in 1963. "It was very daring of her to do that," McGrew said of her mother. A long-distance relationship developed over the years. Shortly before they were married in 1967, Harper flew from Vermont to Denver on a business trip and decided to detour to California to pay her a visit. It was his birthday, and, "somewhere over Kansas," he was startled to see a flight attendant, who had been tipped off by Virginia, walking toward down the aisle with a birthday cake with candles. He laughs now thinking about it.
19900909000000000	JUDGE ORDERS TRIAL FOR MAN WHO AIDED WIFE'S DEATH. A 72-year-old man who said love moved him to complete his terminally ill wife's suicide attempt was ordered Friday to stand trial on murder and conspiracy charges. Bertram Harper faces mandatory life imprisonment if convicted of conspiring to murder his 69-year-old wife, Virginia, who died Aug. 19 in the motel room they rented after flying to Michigan from their home in Loomis, Calif. Mrs. Harper planned her suicide after learning she was terminally ill with breast and liver cancer. The murder case against Harper rests largely on his telling police that he put a plastic bag over his wife's head and secured it around her neck after a non-lethal combination of pills and alcohol caused her to fall asleep. The official cause of death was asphyxiation, according to the Wayne County medical examiner's office. District Judge Henry Zaborowski ordered Harper tried on one count of open murder -- which may be defined at trial as first- or second-degree murder, or manslaughter -- and one count of conspiracy to commit murder. Shanda McGrew, 40, Mrs. Harper's daughter and Harper's stepdaughter, flew to Michigan with them and was present at her mother's death. She is an unindicted co-conspirator in the case. Zaborowski let Harper return to California under $25,000 bond. He probably will not have to return to Michigan until his trial begins in late October or early November, defense lawyer Hugh Davis said. Harper, a retired engineer, was asked after the hearing whether he feared spending the rest of his life in prison. "I don't think it's ever going to get to that point," he replied. "But if it comes to that, I'm 72 years old. I don't have that much time left." Hours after his wife's death, Harper told police they had chose to come to Michigan because they believed the state had no law making it illegal to assist in a suicide. Under California law, such an act is a felony, punishable by up to five years in prison. Harper cited a 1983 Michigan Court of Appeals ruling listed in a book by Derek Humphry, executive director of the Hemlock Society, which advocates death on demand for the terminally ill. Mrs. Harper was a member of the Eugene, Ore.-based group, which is paying for Harper's legal defense. Assistant Wayne County prosecutor Timothy Kenny argued that the ruling did not outweigh a 1920 case in which the state Supreme Court upheld the first-degree murder conviction of a man who mixed poison for his ailing wife and left it within her reach. Kenny argued that Harper, in tying the bag over his sleeping wife's head and not calling police until an hour after she stopped breathing, did more than simply assist in her death. Under Michigan law, first-degree murder is punished by mandatory life imprisonment; second-degree murder by up to life imprisonment, and manslaughter by up to 15 years in prison.
19900914000000000	KIN MAY REMOVE FOOD TUBES, SAYS TOP FLORIDA COURT. The Florida Supreme Court ruled Thursday that relatives or guardians can order the removal of feeding tubes that keep brain-damaged people alive, even if the patients have not signed "living wills." The justices said the guardians do not need a court's approval in each individual case. However, the patient must have expressed, at least verbally, a preference for dying rather than being kept alive with feeding tubes. The foundation of the "right-to-die" decision, which came in the case of an 89-year-old woman who died last summer, is the right to privacy in the state constitution. "This case resolves a question of an individual's constitutional right of self-determination," Justice Rosemary Barkett wrote in the majority opinion. The woman at the center of the case, Estelle Browning, spent the last 2 1/2 years of her life hooked up to feeding tubes that she had earlier, in a "living will," said she did not want. She suffered permanent brain damage in a stroke and was left in a vegetative state, unable to swallow or communicate. She was not comatose. Doris Herbert, Browning's second cousin and only living relative, was named her guardian. Herbert sought permission to remove the tubes in 1988. The state fought the request and a trial court denied it. But a state appeals court said the state's constitution allowed it, and the issue was reviewed by the Supreme Court.
19921003000000000	FT  03 OCT 92 / Truth of the Matter: The quality of mercy - Hugh Dickinson, Dean of Salisbury, considers the call for mercy killings following a doctor's conviction for giving an elderly patient a fatal injection. WHAT PRICE the tyranny of the abstract noun? I met the phrase for the first time recently and recognised its face at once. Abstract nouns get canonised. They get put in manifestos and men and women - though fewer women I suspect  -proceed to shed their life blood, and other people's, in defence of them. Meanwhile reality has moved on and the abstraction is beached like some beautiful empty shell after the tide has ebbed. Is 'The Sanctity of Life' one such? Or more emphatically, 'The Absolute Sanctity of Life'? My mother's family were farmers in South Africa and somewhere in the family folklore there is a story of a young man and his best friend riding out into the bush to shoot game. Some 20 miles from home they encounter and wound a lion. But the friend is thrown from his horse and terribly mauled by the wounded beast. His injuries were appalling and agonising. Obviously he cannot survive the long rough journey home. To leave him and ride for help is to abandon him to the lions. To stay with him only a prolongation of his terrible pain. The only kindly solution is quick and merciful oblivion. The bullet in the back of the head was his only option and so he shot his friend. Most Christian moral theologians would agree. In spite of much loud advocacy from Christian protest groups, I do not find the Absolute Sanctity of Life written anywhere in scripture or tradition. 'Thou shalt not kill' means 'no murder'. But killing abounds in the Old Testament. The long held concept of The Just War has a respectable place in Christian moral theology, and was much in play in the months leading up the Gulf War. So the Sanctity of Life seems easily suspended when more urgent interests supervene. There are more than 100,000 Iraqi corpses, (mostly unlettered peasants) in the desert sands following the Gulf War - but then a good deal of holy oil got spilt as well. For, whatever we may say, most of us, governments and terrorists alike, believe and act on the belief that there are a good many other things further up the sanctity scale than human life. Other abstract nouns, no doubt. But when I come to lie in mortal pain, I don't want any abstract noun standing between me and merciful oblivion. I have had enough experience of pain in my 60 years inside this creaky body to be sure of that, but I certainly do not want to put my doctor in the postion of having to break the most solemn oath of his profession, to save life not to take it. He must not cross that boundary. There has been much comment in the press about the case of Dr Alan Cox, tried and convicted in Winchester Crown Court for the attempted murder of a patient. The moral and practical issues are immensely complex and confusing and not much helped by abstract nouns. Public debate is essential for I have no doubt that the pressure for some form of legal euthanasia will become irresistible in the next 50 years. If we are to go that way we must get it right. Clearly the Winchester jury was right in law. Dr Cox intended to kill. He was therefore guilty. But mens rea (guilty intent) is a slippery fish. The doctor's choice of drug was not a painkiller but a heart stopper. A bullet would have had the same purposes and effect. He chose to end the pain by ending the life. But his intention was not malign, it was benign. If 'Always do unto others what you would have them do unto you' is the greatest moral precept of human relationships then it could be said he was doing the same final act of loving service that his friend did for the young man mauled by the lion. I would hope so to be loved myself in such a case. Should we say then a friend may do it but a doctor may not - even to end intolerable pain? Moral philosophers have a useful concept of 'double effect'. In this case we have two effects: pain killing and life killing. It is morally acceptable for a doctor to administer a drug to kill pain even if the immediate or longer-term consequence is the death of the patient. It is morally unacceptable for a doctor to administer a life-killing drug as a way of ending pain. A + B is alright, B + A is not. It is a subtle line, you may think, between 'kill to end the pain' and 'kill the pain and so end the life', but it is one on which their solemn oath and our essential trust in our doctors stands or falls. It is too dangerous to allow mercy killing to go on sub rosa amid a kindly conspiracy of silence among the medics. The conclusion I draw from this, though with some trepidation, is not that euthanasia in such circumstances must be always banned. It is rather that the burden of this decision must not be left to doctors. The vast majority of cases will continue to fall on the acceptable side of the line, and will offer patients the benign exit through pain killing drugs: but these exceptional cases will have to be held by the community through appropriate panels in partnership with the best medical advice. Death is not a medical responsibility. It belongs to all of us. The case of excessive pain is not the only one that will come to claim the panel's attention. There is a continuum through irreversible coma, Alzheimer's, to premature senile dementia and on to mental handicap and inconvenient old age. This is the dreaded slippery slope. But the social pressure to move on to that slope is already irresistible. Many doctors are standing at its upper edge. Legal enforceable guidelines or legally constituted panels are the only bulwark against the slide. The ethical problem in these cases is rather different but if we do not address it and find an acceptable legal protection for it I believe we will find people taking their own lives and the lives of their dear ones into their own hands. Less benign agencies may follow. What totalitarian regimes or venal doctors might get up to once the wall is breached is certainly frightening but I do not think they will be deterred more in the future than they have been in the past by us shouting the Sanctity of Life into their unheeding ears. Tight legislation will do more to save life and provide easeful death than any abstract nouns.
19921014000000000	FT  14 OCT 92 / World News In Brief: IRA blast victim. David Heffer, victim of the Covent Garden pub bomb, died of his injuries. The life-support machine was switched off with the consent of his relatives, a spokesman for University College hospital said.
19921204000000000	FT  04 DEC 92 / World News in Brief: Judges set to dismiss Bland appeal. The Court of Appeal has indicated it would unanimously dismiss the appeal against the High Court ruling that doctors can discontinue the artificial feeding of Hillsborough victim Tony Bland.
19930205000000000	FT  05 FEB 93 / World News in Brief: Hillsborough victim allowed to die. Hillsborough victim Tony Bland, aged 21, is likely to die from infection within two weeks, his doctors said after the House of Lords ruled that his artificial feeding can be stopped. He has been in a persistent vegetative state in Airedale General Hospital, West Yorkshire, since he was crushed at the FA Cup semi-final in April 1989.
19930220000000000	FT  20 FEB 93 / Truth of the matter: Caring for the carers - Euthanasia. IN THE current debate on how far doctors may go to relieve the sufferings of the terminally ill, I believe the advances in palliative medicine have often been underestimated, particularly by those who say mercy killing can be justified. The UK is a world leader in this branch of medicine (the science of treatments to relieve symptoms created by disease, rather than curing the disease itself). It started when Dame Cicely Sanders founded the Modern Hospice Movement in 1959. A new concept at the time, it unfortunately continues to be an alien concept today. Palliative medicine is now a recognised postgraduate speciality in the National Health Service. It is, however, unique, in that it started in people's homes and in the charitable sector. The health service recognised the enormous value of charitable hospices and has therefore incorporated and accredited some hospices in which doctors can train in the speciality. It is well-known that most people wish to die at home. The reality is that most people die in hospitals. This can be changed. The answer is to support patients and their relatives in the home. In 1911, 27-year-old Douglas Macmillan looked on helplessly as his father suffered from, and eventually died from, cancer of the oesophagus. Later that same year he set up Cancer Relief. Today there are nearly 1,000 Macmillan nurses throughout the United Kingdom, most of whom are community-based. Recently, the role of the Macmillan nurses has extended into helping improve care for patients in hospitals as well. Their main role is support and advice about alleviation of symptoms. Ask yourself, what is the role of a hospice? Many will answer: it is a refuge for the dying. No, I say, it is a place to control symptoms that cannot be managed at home. The symptoms may be those of the patients or the carer. The reasons for admission to a hospice are numerous. They include physical symptoms such as pain, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, loss of mobility and many others. There are emotional factors such as fear, anxiety, panic or depression. The list is endless. Then there is the question of a carer, or lack of a carer at home. Respite admissions, offering a period of rest for the patient and the family, is also common. Pain control is, of course, essential to the running of a good Palliative Medicine Unit. Pain has many components to it. It is influenced by disease, anxiety, previous experiences and fear. It is rare that pain cannot be controlled, although each patient has a different pain threshold. The greatest fear of dying patients, and indeed, the public at large, is pain. The cry of 'I would rather die than be in pain' is heard all too often. The reality is that the vast majority of patients' pain is well controlled by specialists in this field. In an extremely small minority, if pain control is inadequate, sedation is an alternative. This is effectively increasing the patient's sleep. It is not taking life. It is kind. It is compassionate. It is merciful to both the patient and his or her family and loved ones. Dealing with dying patients every day, I have yet to come across a patient to whom we were not able to bring comfort in the last phases of life. The most important question is therefore one of education, not euthanasia. If patients and doctors know where to turn for help, cases such as that of Dr Alan Cox, the Winchester doctor who was found guilty of killing a terminally ill patient, will be history. The health service has recognised the need. The speciality is growing and new posts are being created by the NHS annually. Ultimately, we should have palliative medicine physicians in all hospitals caring for those that are terminally ill. In a column on this page, Hugh Dickinson, the Dean of Salisbury, said that if we do not 'address it (euthanasia) and find and acceptable legal protection for it, I believe we will find people taking their own lives and the lives of their dear ones into their own hands'. May I contradict him and say that euthanasia is the removal of life and is not acceptable, and if the law changes to make it in any way acceptable, then we most certainly will run the risk of people taking the lives of their dear ones. Taking one's own life is a different matter altogether. So let us not change the law about euthanasia, but rather change our attitudes to dying. Dr Julia Riley is senior registrar, The Princess Alice Hospice, Esher.
19930304000000000	FT  04 MAR 93 / World News in Brief: Hillsborough victim dies. Hillsborough disaster victim Tony Bland, 22, died last night after a court ruled last month that doctors could stop feeding him.
19930305000000000	FT  05 MAR 93 / World News in Brief: Doctor dismisses threat. Jim Howe, the doctor who treated Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland, dismissed as 'foolish' a former priest's threat to launch a private prosecution against him for murder. Mr Bland died in a West Yorkshire hospital on Wednesday after a court ruled that his life support systems could be switched off.
19930426000000000	FT  26 APR 93 / Euthanasia support 'at record level'. SUPPORT for voluntary euthanasia for the incurably ill is at a record level, Exit, the Voluntary Euthanasia Society, said yesterday. A total of 79 per cent of people questioned in a survey agreed that adults suffering incurable illness should receive 'medical help to a peaceful death'.
